2nd of August, I was 25 years old and
I'm standing in the Oval Office with the
president, the vice president, the
national security adviser, the CIA
director. The American ambassador in
Baghdad at the time was April Glassby.
That's where the conspiracy theory comes
from uh in terms of there were people
who wanted [music] Saddam to
>> We had zero national interest in Saddam
invading Kuwait.
>> What [music] about the oil?
And what happened next took everyone by
surprise. Literally the entire Iraqi
military is heading south.
>> Invasion. Invasion. Going to take the
whole the whole country. The morning of
the invasion, the Iraqis [music]
announced that Ahmed Khib would be the
governor of occupied K. At 3:00 that
afternoon, [music] Margaret Thatcher
called him. She was the prime minister
of the UK, the iron lady, right? She
said, "George, now is not the time to go
wobbly."
Asel Gabandi, she was a bonafide hero.
What did you find about Saddam before
the invasion? Our bottom line
psychological [music] analysis was that
he was a sociopath.
>> Whenever something like this happens,
the sirens, it's it makes me think of
>> Yes. If we feel this, what did they
feel? What happened?
>> Mhm. I'll never forget the deputy
national security adviser having no
shoes. That's like the one image [music]
that sticks with me the most from
September 11th.
>> Yeah. Right.
>> This is the guy who's supposed to be
protecting us and leading the country
and he's running away with no shoes.
>> Never saw anything like it.
>> It's a disappointment, right?
>> Mhm. It
>> was a complete failure of leadership.
And then Richard Pearl, the
neoconservative,
on the 12th of September, he went to the
White House and he said, "You know, we
have to attack Iraq, right?"
>> 12th of September, right?
>> He was the one that that came up with
the idea. We have to attack Iraq. This
is our opportunity.
Next thing you know, we're going to
circle back to this, but before we we we
get there, we're going to speak about
Kuwait September 11th, if that makes
sense.
>> Sure.
>> Um
1990, August 1919.
>> Yep.
>> Um Iraq
led by Saddam
>> M
>> decides to invade Kuwait.
>> Mhm.
>> At that time, you were uh in the CIA. Uh
you were working in Langley as an
analyst.
>> Yes. and uh just a a couple of a year
before that you were you were hired by
the CIA around the year before that. So
>> um and you were given Saddam to focus on
um and you were you were focused on
leadership psychology. So let's talk
about this context. What were you
focused on? Were what did you find about
Saddam before the invasion happened?
>> Right. So I was hired by the CIA. They
made me an offer in uh December of 1989.
I gladly took it. So that first week of
January, I started working at the CIA
and I was made an analyst in something
called the Office of Leadership
Analysis.
>> Yeah. So I'm just going to do this for
you.
>> Sure.
>> So I just was going to fix this for you,
but sorry.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah. So I was made an analyst in the
office of leadership analysis which was
the psychology,
anthropology, sociology,
the PhDs
uh would do long-distance psychological
evaluations of world leaders. I'm I'm
smiling because
I was given Iraq
>> to be my the country that I covered. And
I said, "Iraq, huh?" And my new boss
said, "I know." He said, "Don't be
disappointed.
Nothing ever happens there. It's the
same cabinet since the 1968 revolution.
>> So they're give they're given this
because you're a beginner.
>> Because I'm a beginner. And he told me
these were his exact words. He said,
"Work hard, learn the writing style, and
in a year you can transfer to something
interesting like Romania."
>> Romania was interesting at the time.
>> Well, they had just overthrown Chashescu
like the week before. [laughter]
>> Okay. So I said, "Okay,
all right. This is going to be boring,
but that's okay." And then they said,
"Why don't you learn about Kuwait, too,
because we have good relations with
Kuwait. Our officials meet with the
Kuwaitis. That'll give you something to
keep your your day full." I said,
"Okay."
Iraq was so slow for me. There were some
days where we didn't get a single report
from anybody.
CIA, NSA, State Department, Defense
Department, press, nothing.
>> I would just kind of sit there like this
>> for a whole day.
>> For a whole day, waiting for somebody,
usually a Friday, waiting for somebody
to send something in. Anything. Nothing.
Kuwait was far more interesting because
there was the the conversation at the
time about the majus and bringing the
majus back and it was just a very
interesting period in Kuwaiti politics
and then I got to know Kuwaitis in
Washington mostly at the Kuwaiti
embassy. Ambassador Sa Naser was just a
lovely lovely man very generous with his
time. We had very good close
relationship with him. So part of your
work you had to um
>> Yeah. I was not undercover. I was an
overt CI CIA employee. So I would go and
say, "Hello, Mr. Ambassador. I'm John
Kiryaku from the CIA."
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. So he he knew me. I would we would
go to all the same events. He knew me as
that kid from the CIA. We weren't, you
know, close or anything. He was far too
important and too senior. So, um,
in June of 1990,
one of the political analysts said in
one of our regular meetings, we would
meet every day at 9:00 just to talk
about what was going on in the region,
what happened overnight, any interesting
news, who died, you know, who was fired
from what cabinet, that kind of thing.
and he said, "I'm seeing some odd
military movements in Iraq. That's not
something I covered. It was not
something I paid attention to." So, and
I'm new at the time. I've only been
there for 6 months. So, I was happy to
listen to what he had to say. And I
remember my boss saying, "What kind of
military movements are you talking
about?" And he said, "Saddam is not just
pulling troops out of Kurdistan to send
them south toward the border, but we're
seeing movements among the Republican
Guard, which make me think that
something's up."
It was another couple of weeks before
the Iraqis began to make accusations
against Kuwait related to oil.
And so on June 30th, we published our
very first paper for the White House and
the Pentagon saying something's
happening in Iraq. We're not exactly
sure what it is, but it looks at this
early stage like they're trying to
frighten the Kuwaitis.
>> That was June. We watched it very, very
closely through the month of July. And
then we reached out to the Kuis and we
said, "We don't know if you're picking
this up, but we are and we think that
the Iraqis are a threat to you." And the
Kuwaiti government came back and said,
"No, we're seeing the same thing. We
think the Iraqis are a threat as well."
So, we agreed to continue sharing
information
and um in July, we're talking to the
Kuis. The Kuwaitis are talking to us.
We're telling them, "Be careful. there's
there's a problem in the north.
And then
at the CIA, we
we disagreed a lot amongst ourselves
about
whether the Iraqis were going to invade.
If they did invade, were they just going
to take the Romela oil field
>> or were they going to try to take the
whole country,
>> the disputed area,
>> right? [snorts] almost none of us
believed in July of 1990 that they would
take the whole country. It didn't make
any sense. And then
that July, I was um I was part of a CIA
sports league. Everything at the CIA
they want you to do with other CIA
people.
>> You want to sing songs, they have a CIA
choir.
>> Why?
>> Because everybody has security clearance
and you can talk about classified
information and not get in trouble.
So, I was playing softball. I was on the
CIA softball team. And one of the old
men came up, old men. He was probably
40. In my mind, he was an old man. So,
one of the old men came up to me and
said, "Hey, wanted to talk to you." I
said, "Sure." He said, "Uh, so Iraq and
Kuwait, huh?" And I said, "Yeah." And he
said, "I think you don't understand how
important this is." I said, 'How do you
figure?'
>> He said, 'It's not unusual for the
countries we cover to go to war. It's
very unusual for the countries we cover
to go to war with us.
This is going to be ugly. That was the
very first time that I thought
we're going to go to war. It hadn't
occurred to me that we were going to go
to war.
>> I thought it was just going to be
something between Iraq and Kuwait. It'll
be a little border scuffle and and you
know they're going to have talks in Riad
or something and it's going to go away.
But the Iraqis kept moving south.
Finally, we were arguing amongst
ourselves, the analysts, about whether
this was going to be an actual invasion
or if it was going to be an incursion
where they just they cross the border a
little bit and then they pull back. So I
said, "Guys, why don't we just call the
defense attaches in Baghdad?
>> We'll ask him to drive down to the
Kuwaiti border this weekend and just
call us and tell us what he sees." They
said, "Nah, that's a great that's a
great idea."
>> Okay.
>> So I called him and I said, "Conel,
we're we're arguing over here in
Washington. We don't really we don't
really know what to expect. can you
drive down to the Kuwaiti border and
then just tell us what you happen to see
on the way down.
So he does that over the weekend. He he
did it on a Thursday and he called us
Thursday night. It was late his time,
Baghdad time. We were still at the
office and when he called he said
literally the entire Iraqi military is
heading south.
>> Wow.
>> The whole military. It's going to be an
invasion.
>> Invasion.
>> Invasion. They're going to take the
whole the whole country.
>> Well, that was on a Thursday. What date?
Do you remember?
>> It was on a Thursday.
It was It was about a week before the
invasion. Okay.
>> The invasion was
>> the 2nd of August.
>> Yeah, it was a second, but I don't
remember what day it was. Was it a
Tuesday?
>> It was on a Thursday.
>> A Thursday. Okay. So, it was a week
before.
>> Okay. So,
so we we wrote a paper for the president
and um and it was in the president's
daily brief. It went to the president
and the vice president, the national
security adviser, secretary of state and
the deputy secretary of state, secretary
of defense and the deputy secretary of
defense and the chairman and joint and
vice chairman of the joint chiefs of
staff. So all the people that needed to
see it saw it that it is the view of
every analyst at the CIA who works on
either Iraq or Kuwait or oil that the
Iraqis are going to cross the border and
take the whole country.
So we we told the Kuwaitis what our what
our analysis was.
Now on the on the one hand
we were fortunate in that
it was August and so so many kuises were
outside the country. They were on
holiday. They're in the states or in the
UK or Lebanon or Cyprus or wherever
vacations with their family. So a lot of
people were out but a lot of people
weren't out and most of the ruling
family was was in Kuwait.
>> Yeah.
>> So
So you told Yeah. We told the Kuwaitis
who are the Kuwaitis that who do you
usually communicate to?
>> We would do it two ways. We would do it
through the Kuwaiti embassy which which
would have been Ambassador Salaser Sabah
and then in Kuwait the ambassador would
have gone to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Minister of Defense.
>> Okay.
And as I said, our relationship with the
Kuwaiti government was was very close at
the time. Even though Koi was a member
of the non-aligned movement, the NAM, we
still had good relations, especially as
it related to things like odd things
like uh human rights or labor affairs,
things like that. We were very close
with the Kuwaiti government.
>> So you had a close relationship with
with the Kuwaitis and they were part of
the non-allied movement.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and that was a week before. Well,
>> yeah.
>> So what happened after? You know, I I
should add as background,
remember I was given this job as a
training job, a training account is what
they called it, so that I could go on to
something more important like Romania.
And so for those of us junior analysts
who who couldn't get published because
there was nothing happening either in
Iraq or Kuwait for the you know the year
before the uh invasion at least. Um we
had an in-house magazine
that we would publish. We would write
articles for the magazine and the
magazine would just go to all the
analysts.
>> So at least you could say I got
published in it was called the
leadership review.
So I needed to get published if I had
any hope of being promoted. And um
and so I said, you know, there's this
Kuwaiti who's very interesting to me.
His name is Dr. Ahmed Katib.
>> He has such an interesting background.
So I wrote a one-page like a little
biographical,
you know, this is he went to university
in in Beirut and he was living with Gor
Habash and they created the PFLP
together and he's a medical doctor and
he came back and he's you know
>> communist and whatever.
He was just an interesting character.
And so
on August 1st,
my boss
told everybody, "Get a good night's
sleep because tomorrow's going to be a
very long day."
>> August 1st.
>> Yeah.
>> Why is that?
>> You could not squeeze one more Iraqi
soldier onto the border.
>> Oh, so it was inevitable.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> It wasn't a surprise attack.
>> No,
the timing was a surprise.
You know, there were still there were
still people everywhere at the CIA, at
the White House, at the State
Department, in the Kuwaiti government
who thought this was a bluff.
He's he's going to demand some kind of
concession. He's going to try to be he's
going to try to look like a strong man.
He's going to bully the Kuwaitis and
then he's going to take his spoils and
go back to Baghdad
>> as as CIA. And and that's really where
there is a a theory that comes in and
they say the CIA and the Americans knew
what was happening and they didn't do
anything to stop it.
>> It's not true. That's not true at all.
No, even as a junior analyst, I could
see what was happening. There were
analytic disagreements over what this
meant, and we had to hash out those
disagreements in the 6 or 8 weeks before
the invasion actually took place. The
real drama was at the State Department.
>> Oh,
>> well, because the State Department
disagreed with us.
It's not uncommon to have bureaucratic
disagreements between CIA, State, and
DoD, the Department of Defense. Not
unusual at all. Happens every single
day.
And usually what will happen is when
you're writing something for the
president, if the State Department
disagrees, they'll put what's called a
disscent box at the bottom of the paper
saying the State Department disagrees
with this analysis. Our analysis is
this.
>> So the president can say, "Okay, the CIA
says this, the Defense Department is
agreeing with it. DIA, NSA are agreeing
with it, but the State Department
disagrees with it." and they have a
pretty good argument at the bottom.
Well, the State Department believed that
this was this was tough guy diplomacy
that Saddam was just trying to bully the
Kuwaiti government.
And so,
>> yeah, for context, we no one ever
expected that to happen. It was a the
relationship between Iraq and Kuwait and
the Gulf countries
>> and the Arab states,
>> right,
>> at the time, when you speak to anyone at
the time, they would say no one would
ever dare to think of something like
that. No, because Iran was the enemy,
not Iraq. It was supposed to be Iraq
that was protecting the Gulf States
against Iran from Iran.
So,
the American ambassador in Baghdad at
the time was April Glasby. April lived
with her mother. Her mother was in her
80s. They they lived together in the
ambassador's house in uh in Baghdad.
And April was supposed to go on
vacation.
I think it was on July the 30th or 31st.
She and her mother were coming home for
like six weeks. Our embassy in Baghdad
was very very small. It only had about
four people in it.
>> The ambassador, the deputy ambassador,
the defense ate and a consular officer.
That's it.
>> But the country being very important in
the Middle East, you just had four.
>> But nothing ever happened there.
>> Okay.
>> We didn't have any national interests
there,
>> you know. So Iraq was not an enemy at
the time.
>> No, it was kind of a nutty country and
he was a crazy person leading it, but it
it didn't impact us in any way. Plus, he
was holding the Iranians back, which is
what we really wanted.
So,
April wrote to Secretary James Baker,
Secretary of State, and said, uh, we
have to address this directly with
Saddam Hussein. we have to meet with him
and tell him what the American position
is. Now, here's where the disconnect
was, and this is where this this was the
birth of the conspiracy theories.
Secretary Baker sent her a cable called
a notice cable, which stands for no
dissemination, which means it goes
directly from the Secretary of State to
the ambassador. The only other
organization that gets a copy is the
CIA. But a no dis a no disk cable is so
sensitive that that the cable can only
be printed in the CIA operations center.
>> So if you're an analyst like I was, you
can go up to the operations center on
the seventh floor. You can read it. You
can take notes on it, but you can't
quote it and you can't copy it. That
that's how sensitive it is. So,
Secretary Baker sends a notice cable to
to April Glasby and he says he said a
lot of things, but the most important
thing that he said was to tell Saddam
that the United States government does
not take a position on ArabA border
disputes. Now, that was the nature of
the disagreement.
Because at the CIA, we said, "This isn't
a border dispute. It's going to be an
invasion."
>> And the State Department said, "We
disagree with your analysis. We think
this is just about the Romela oil
field." And so he told her to tell
Saddam, "This is between you and the
Kuwaitis.
We don't take a position on border
disputes."
>> If you were if you were planning to
invade, how would you think of the point
that
>> that was the green light? If I were
Saddam Hussein, I would have told Isat
Ibrahim or Tarak Aziz or whomever the
Americans just gave me the green light
and in fact we didn't. Do you think he
might have had an idea that he just
wanted to go to Rome, but when he got
this message, he said, "Oh, this is a
chance for us to invade the whole
country now."
>> That's possible. Although it wouldn't
account for the large scale military
movements, but yeah, that's possible.
Sure.
>> Yeah. So there were at least a dozen of
us, 10 or 12 of us analysts waiting,
waiting, waiting in the operation center
just standing there waiting for her
meeting with Saddam to end so she could
drive back to the embassy and then write
a no dis cable back to the Secretary of
State so we could see what did Saddam
say when she gave these talking points.
>> What did he say? He didn't say anything.
And she said she had only met with him
three times in all the the years that
she was ambassador there. And she said
that that was a normal meeting with
Saddam. He would just kind of sit there
and stare at you and not respond. He'll
listen to your talking points and then
he gets up.
He also, she said, he had this odd power
trip habit that when you went to shake
his hand, he would hold his hand like
this.
>> Yes. So that you had to reach out with
your hand causing you to bow a little
bit.
>> He liked that.
>> You worked on his psychology a lot.
>> I did.
>> So what can you tell us about his
psychology?
>> Our bottom line psychological analysis
was that he was a sociopath. He was
unable to feel emotion, empathy, regret,
remorse. He killed like a like a
criminal syndicate boss kills. It's just
business, nothing personal. Maybe he's
going to have a party for you or maybe
he's going to execute you. You don't
know when you get the uh the call that
Saddam wants to see you. Um
>> they killed his daughter's uh husband.
>> Both of them. Hussein Camel and Saddam
Camel murdered them both. His son his
son Odessed
was a psychopath.
>> OD.
>> Yeah. a dangerous crazy
>> bloodthirsty murderer
was a sociopath like his father but he
wasn't crazy and then you had
Barzaniti
Sabawi
um and what was the uh the other brother
the third brother Sabawi Barzan and I
forget the other one
>> Ali Kimawi as well
>> Ali uh Ali Hassan Al Majid was was like
u insane.
>> Yeah.
>> The butcher of Kurdistan. Chemical Ali.
>> Yeah. These are welldeserved nicknames.
>> So, so, so when she do you think she
might have
April and we were being very objective
just like any human being
>> when you go to someone and that person
is silent.
>> Mhm.
>> And you start saying more things that
you than you're supposed to say.
How do you think April
>> Yeah.
>> before she told Saddam, how do you think
April understood the message? Um because
obviously she communicated the message.
How do you think she understood it that
even if Saddam invades
>> that was the mistake that she made? She
was a seasoned diplomat. She was a an
ambassador at least three times. Baker
was not. Baker was Secretary of State.
April knew more about diplomacy than
Baker did. And April should have told
Baker, "These talking points are
unacceptable."
Not when the CIA is writing every day
that Iraq is going to invade Kuwait.
These talking points are not acceptable.
But she never said that.
>> That's where the conspiracy theory comes
from uh in terms of there were people
who wanted Saddam to invade.
>> We had zero national interest in Saddam
invading Kuwait. What about the oil and
then but or having um having American
troops in the in the Middle East? There
was things that came.
>> But if if Iran is a threat, there are
always going to be troops in the in the
Middle East. They didn't have to
specifically be in in Kuwait. And we sit
on an ocean of oil in the United States.
And we were friendly with Venezuela at
the time. They have the largest oil
reserves in the world.
>> So, it wasn't the thing.
>> It wasn't about oil. I remember getting
into an argument with a guy in the
embassy here right after the liberation.
He was furious that that we had
liberated Kuwait. He said, "We should
have just let them fight their own
battles." I said, "Are you crazy? You
know how big Iraq is? You know how many
troops Iraq has?" And he said, "If this
country had gravel instead of oil, would
we have done this?" And I said, "It
doesn't matter.
If the Kuwaitis asked us to help them,
why wouldn't we help them? I mean, oil
or no oil, it becomes a human rights
issue. The Iraqis were committing
atrocities against Kuwaiti civilians, so
we're we're honorbound to help them. Do
you think everyone holds this position
in uh like I respect your your view and
position really? And I think that's very
that's that's something that I believe
in too. Human rights comes before
everything else.
>> Yeah.
>> But do you think that's what politics is
about? I think politics is about greed
and land.
>> I I think I'm probably in the minority.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> Especially post 911. I'm definitely in
the minority post 911.
>> Let me finish. What uh the reason why I
brought Ahmed Kib up.
The day the day after the invasion, the
morning of the invasion, the Iraqis
announced that Ahmed Khib would be the
governor of occupied Kuwait, but they
had never said anything to Ahmed Kib.
So, we get this report flash from the
Associated Press, Ahmed Katib, named new
leader of Kuwait.
>> And then Katib is like, "What? No, I'm
not." And then he pledged his loyalty to
the uh to the government of Kuwait
and to the ruling family.
But before he did that, I walked into
the office early on August the
boss said, "Uh, don't take your jacket
off. We're going to the White House." I
had never been to the White House
before. I had been as a tourist where
you just go through a few rooms.
So, we drove to the White House and
there was a Marine waiting for us and he
led us into the Oval Office.
>> 2nd of August.
>> 2nd of August. I was 25 years old. And
I'm standing in the Oval Office with the
president, the vice president, the
national security adviser, the CIA
director, my boss, and me.
So, we go in. I was a nervous wreck.
And I remember very clearly my first
thought. I was standing there just
looking around and I'm looking at the
president and I thought my friends would
not believe me in a thousand years if I
told them where I was right now. I I
couldn't believe it myself. So I'm
standing there. The president was very
upset, very preoccupied. He had he was
on the phone with Ambassador Saw Nasa
when when we walked in.
>> George Bush.
>> George HW Bush. That's right. And so
we're standing there and he says,
"Gentlemen, please sit down. sit down.
He was George HW Bush was one of the
most beloved
presidents of my lifetime.
>> Well, you're you're a lefty a little
bit.
>> And I'm a lefty and he was not a lefty.
>> Um but he had been the CIA director for
11 months and it was he in his words it
was the greatest job he ever had in his
life. Better than being president.
And so
when I was still there, when his son was
president, he would come to CIA CIA
headquarters. And he would just walk up
and down the halls.
>> He just likes it there.
>> And people would say, "Hey, President
Bush is in the hall." And we would go
out and just start clapping. And then he
would come over and shake hands. How's
everybody? Keep up the good work.
>> That's the kind of person he was. So
anyway, I had never met him at that
point. That was the first time I met
him. So we walked in and he says,
"Gentlemen, please sit down. Sit down."
So he and the vice president were
sitting in these two very nice oversted
chairs and then the CIA director and the
national security adviser were sitting
in two like normal less comfortable
chairs and then my boss and I sat on the
couch.
So we all sit down and then the
president says, "Well,
now what do we do?" And then everybody
turns and looks at me and I'm looking at
them and it took me a second and I said,
"Oh, well,
[clears throat]
Mr. President, as you know, Iraqi troops
crossed the border at whatever it was,
2:00 in the morning. They took the whole
of Kuwait. The ruling family fled to um
Saudi Arabia. They're with the Saudis
now. U blah blah blah blah blah." and he
says, ' Do we know anything about who's
in charge in Kuwait now?
And this is why I brought up Dr. Katib.
And I said, 'Yes, actually, we know a
lot about him. His name is Dr. Ahmed
Katib,
and uh he was educated at the at the
American University of Beirut. He earned
a degree in medicine, but his college
roommate was George Habash. And together
they founded the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine.
And the vice president says, "Jesus
Christ." [laughter]
>> That was before he denied. But
>> that was before it was just a matter of
a couple of hours when the Iraqis said
it and he denied it. And the meeting was
right in the middle of those couple of
hours.
>> So Bush says, "Gentlemen, thank you.
Thank you.
I don't need anything else."
>> So we all stood up and we walked out.
Later that afternoon, something happened
that has become famous. At 3:00 that
afternoon, Margaret Thatcher called him.
She was the prime minister of the UK,
the Iron Lady, right? And she said
something that has become famous. She
said, "George, now's not the time to go
wobbly."
>> She knew how important
>> she knew just how important this was,
that we had to move troops there and we
had to destroy Saddam Hussein. She's the
one who said it because he was like, "Oh
my god, what do I do? I'm not sure what
to do. I'm not sure where the Navy is
and we're too far away." There was
another problem I remember as a junior
analyst.
Satellites were very difficult to move
and we didn't have any satellites over
Kuwait. Why would we?
>> So satellites is for you to understand
what's happening on the ground.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> We didn't have any satellites looking at
Kuwait because we were friends with
Kuwait. So, we had to move one of our
satellites from the Soviet Union.
>> No way.
>> Uhhuh. This is why it took until
February
>> to invade
>> to invade to to counterattack. Yes.
Because
>> that that satellite had to move in slow
motion from over Moscow to over Kuwait.
And once it was in place, then we were
like, "Okay, now we can do it."
>> So, it takes that much time to
>> It did back then. Now you just go to
Google Earth and just look, you know,
one day old uh photographs, but it was a
different world back then.
Yeah. And I remember I remember Bush
calling Gorbachov.
It was the day before we attacked and he
said, "I know that you're watching our
military movements on satellite. I know
that you're friendly with Saddam
Hussein. I'm asking you as a friend not
to tell the Iraqis what we're doing. And
Gorbachev never said a word.
>> But between the August and between uh
>> February
>> February, there was a meeting with
Gorbachov where the Soviet Union decided
to dismantle it.
>> That's right.
>> And that was crucial. Right.
>> Gorbachov had his own problems. Yes.
That was crucial. the the the Soviets
might have taken a different position
because they had longstanding close
relations with the Iraqis and there was
a lot of oil going back and forth. The
the Russian oil industry was not really
fully exploited like it is today, right?
They made some oil, they produced some
oil, but it was no big deal really.
So
because the Soviet Union was falling
apart at exactly the same time that that
this this invasion was taking place,
Gorbachev
had his own issues. He was afraid that
he would be overthrown. In fact, Bush
and Gorbachev got along very well. And
we picked up intelligence once that
there was a coup being plotted. And so
Bush called him and warned him
>> against him.
>> Oh. And that's how he was able to fend
off these Soviet generals.
>> So we Gorbachov was being contained very
well.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So back to that after after the
meeting, you go back to the office.
>> Yeah. Everybody wanted to know what was
it like? What did he say?
>> Was a huge panic in Kuwait obviously and
>> Oh my god. Yes. And I said, "Guys, we're
going to war. It's clear.
We're going to war."
>> I remember going home that night and my
wife said, "What was it like?" And I
said, "It's unlike anything I've ever
experienced in my life." Even later on,
just to give you an idea.
In February, Ambassador Skip Ganim, he
was the American ambassador, he loved
Kuwait
as much as he loved the United States.
And he said once, this has stuck in my
mind all these 35 years. He said, "I
have a problem that's unique among
American ambassadors anywhere in the
world. I can't get people to stop
writing pro-American graffiti on the
side of the embassy
>> because there Kuwaitis were coming up
and and writing like long live Bush.
[laughter]
>> Yeah.
>> There was a shaad.
>> Uh over by where where was it? Salamia
or
>> Yeah. There.
And
in the middle of the night during the
occupation, people would go and paint
over the word Baghdad in blue and then
they would write bush on top of it. So
it was Shah Bush.
>> And then I remember in ' 91 there was
like this entire generation of babies
that were born and they were named
George.
>> There were even George Bush came to the
>> Oh, came to the parliament.
>> Oh my gosh. that trip. I prepared him
for that trip and I briefed him. That
was the second time I met him. So he was
actually there's a little story there if
you don't mind me jumping ahead a little
bit.
>> Sure. Sure.
>> So
he he wanted to come to Kuwait to his
words to take a victory lap.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. High five everybody.
We've liberated the country. We love
you. You love us. You know that kind of
thing. just have dinners and shake hands
and take pictures and everybody's happy.
And then we got word that uh there was
going to be an assassination attempt.
>> So So when I say you got word, how do
you mean what do you mean you got word?
>> People make stupid mistakes. Okay.
>> And so actually it was the Kuwaitis that
picked it up. We I mean we don't have
we're friends so we don't have reason to
be listening to Kuwaiti telephone calls.
And the Kuwaiti said that there were
these Iraqi agents that
both came from Iraq into Kuwait or were
from among the Bedun and they were
planning this um assassination attempt
and they arrested a whole bunch of
people, 20some people.
And then a couple of um a couple of
months later, I'm sitting in the morning
meeting, the 9:00 meeting that I told
you about, and the secretary came in and
she said, "Uh, John, General Powell's on
the phone for you." And I said, "For me?
How does General Powell knew know who I
am?" Colin Powell at the time was the uh
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
And she said, "I don't know, but he
asked for you personally."
And my boss said, "Well, go answer the
phone." So I went to my desk and I said,
' Good morning, General Pal. May I help
you? And he says very quickly, he
says,"John, if the Iraqis were going to
assassinate the president, who would be
in charge of actually carrying out an
operation like that?" And I said, 'Well,
if you're talking about the aborted
attempt in Kuwait, um Kuwait operations
are run from the Iraqi intelligence
service, Basra Station, but Basra
station in turn is managed by by um
uh Saber Abdulazizuri, his name was he's
the director of the Iraqi Intelligence
Service. And Powell says, "Where does he
physically sit?" And I said, "In IIS
headquarters in Baghdad." And he says,
"Thank you." and he hangs up the phone.
So I go back into the office and
everybody was sitting there. What did he
want? I said he wanted to know where the
director of the Iraqi intelligence
services office was.
Said, "Okay."
8 hours later, we fired 47 cruise
missiles into the Iraqi intelligence
service headquarters and we turned it
into dust.
Mhm. They didn't want to fool around
with these Iraqis. These Iraqi
government officials, these were very
bad people.
>> Yeah,
>> very bad people. Just as happy to kill
you as to smile and shake your hand.
>> 100%.
>> One other thing, um, I gave a briefing
to the CIA's deputy director for
operations. He was he was just intrigued
and appalled by a press report that came
out about a new law that Saddam had
signed that morning. And the law said
that if you criticize Saddam,
they're going to cut out your tongue and
nail it to the front door of your house
>> by law.
>> Yeah. By law. Like in in the official
register of the the government register.
So I I had I was called to go up and
brief him and he said, "Tell me that
this is not true." And I said, "It's
it's true. They haven't done it." And he
said, "Oh my god, the president called
me." He said, and he said, "Did you hear
Saddam is nailing people's tongues to
their front doors? Like we have to take
this guy out."
>> Yeah.
>> And I said, "No, it hasn't happened.
It's a threat. It's on the official, you
know, on the books as an official law.
It's in the the the National Register,
but he hasn't actually done it yet.
And he said, "Good, good. I just don't
want to attack anybody today."
>> Such an Arab thing to do though in terms
of you don't really have Arab culture,
you have Greek culture. There are some
stuff that the Greek culture speaks
about.
>> But for you to turn it into a law,
>> right? Right.
>> Like everyone, every culture has these
things that they talk about. I'll we
have a good this I'll cut your
>> I'll cut your tongue. It's a thing in in
Arabic culture. Right. I worked with a
CIA officer here right after the
liberation. He got into a road rage
incident with a Kuwaiti and what he did
was he lifted up his leg, opened his
window and he was driving with his foot
out of the window to show offense to the
And then the Kuwaiti guy did the same
thing and then they pulled over to fight
and they got out of the cars and they
were like, "What are we doing? This is
so stupid." And then they ended up they
ended up going out and having a I don't
know a juice, a drink or something.
>> Let's go back to the second of August.
You just left the White House. Uh
president told you this is all I need
for now. Thank you, gentlemen. You left.
Now what? What do you do?
>> Yeah. So the CIA at the at the first
sign of of trouble of a major
international event, they set up 24-hour
task force, right? So everybody has to
be scheduled on the task force because I
was the expert on on Iraq from the
psychology uh standpoint. I was one of
the first to go on the task force. So I
did that for about
six weeks. So,
you do like four 12-hour days and then
you're off three. And then four 12-h
hour days, but the midnight shift and
then you're off three. And you just
cycle through like that. And we were
writing
something called a
spotcom.
What's that stand for? A spot commentary
where it's like up to the minute, this
is the intelligence that's coming in.
So, you get a cable saying the Iraqis
did this. And so you say this is what
the Iraqis did. This was it is what it
means. And you fax it to the White
House.
>> So where do you get all of this
information?
>> It's coming from CIA officers all around
the world, from State Department
officers reporting through State
Department embassy channels all around
the world, from NSA, from the Defense
Intelligence Agency, from the Pentagon,
even from ships at sea. If they're
picking up something that the Iraqis are
doing, they report it. And then of
course uh press and media from from all
around the region.
>> Was there CIA on the ground in Kuwait?
>> Uh no.
>> No.
>> Nothing.
>> No. It was very very different from what
the beginning of the Afghan war was
years later.
>> Years later, CIA teams are parachuting
in, buying horses from tribesmen, and
then just riding the horses to Kbble to
overthrow the Taliban. in Kuwait. It was
I mean there was nobody. Everybody was
on vacation.
>> Oh, so you didn't so the CIA never sent
anyone into Kuwait before?
>> No. That would have been so dangerous
that it wouldn't have been worth
whatever information they could have
they could have gained. Now, the
Kuwaitis who had been left behind or who
had stayed behind had formed into these
resistance units. Yeah. And
they were so smart with the way they did
it. They knew that we were listening to
everything, that NSA was listening to
everything. And so if the Kuwaiti
resistance
needed to pass a message to the Pentagon
or to the CIA, they would just call
somebody and just say it knowing that
NSA is going to intercept the call
>> and then send the transcript to the CIA
and to the Pentagon. So it was very
effective.
>> Was there someone in particular that you
remember?
>> There was a woman
Gabandi.
>> That's right. Asal Gabandi.
She was a bonafide hero.
Um,
she was a hero to the point where she
was the one, I think, who best
understood how to use
her phone
>> because we were getting her reporting
literally every single day. Every single
day. And she's talking about Iraqi troop
movements and where the roadblocks are
and where the inspections are. She was
talking about Iraqi atrocities because
the Iraqis as soon as they arrived, they
started raping and killing and pillaging
and stealing. They were monsters. And I
remember one Kuwaiti telling me months
later that um
that he hated all Iraqis. And it
surprised me when he said it. And I
said, "Really? All Iraqis? like just the
average Iraqi soldier. And he said,
"Saddam Hussein didn't rape my sister.
An Iraqi soldier raped my sister. Saddam
Hussein didn't kill my uncle. An Iraqi
soldier killed my uncle." And I said, "I
I get it. I hadn't thought of it that
way." But he was right. It wasn't just,
"Oh, these poor Iraqi soldiers, they
don't want to be here. They're the
brothers of the Kuwaitis." It was
nothing like that. They were monsters.
and they committed terrible crimes here.
In fact,
I'm told now that it no longer exists,
but um immediately upon the liberation,
the Kuwaiti government opened um what
they called uh the torture museum. I I
have many pictures from this museum. It
was in it was in a private home. But
when Kuwait was liberated, um the
Kuwaitis and the Americans both found
dozens of buildings where the Iraqis
were committing torture and they they
would do things like they would take the
cushion off a chair
and so you know, normally you would just
fall right through it if there's no
cushion, but instead they opened up a
toaster and put the coils across the
toaster. So you're sitting on the coils
and then they plug it in and they just
burn your flesh just right through.
Um the government also set up uh the
Kuwaiti government also set up um using
mannequins.
They they showed the condition of of the
bodies of Kuwait resistance fighters who
had been tortured and killed. And then
some of the the equipment that the
Iraqis used to just defile people and
murder them and torture them and do
horrible things, cut their fingers off a
piece at a time. And it was unspeakable.
>> It was the peak of torture uh during
those times.
>> It was incredible. the the level of
cruelty was something that none of us
had ever seen before anywhere.
>> Yeah, that's the thing. It was that if
he built Saddam built a lot of inhumane
systems into the uh the army that these
things just became normal to them and he
was like systematic the way he trained
or the bath regime. That's right. to be
able to come up with all these different
types of See, he would he wouldn't tell
them do this and that. He would just
build the environment around them
>> and make them think in a specific way
>> and then they would just come up with
all of these creative but very ugly ways
of torture.
>> You know, one of our secretaries said to
me one time,
"I don't know why you're so surprised
that he's doing these kinds of things.
He did this during the Iran Iraq war."
And I said, "What did he do?" And she
said, 'D did you know that he
electrified the marshes in the south to
electrocute the Shia fishermen?
I said, "Come on." Yeah, how do you
electrify a marsh? That's not even
possible.
>> And then she went and found the original
report. It was a defense department
report from 1986. And she said, "Look."
And she showed it to me and I said, "My
god, I never even heard of this."
Electrocuting hundreds of people at a
time.
But yeah, he stopped at nothing.
>> Ali Hassan Majid
was, you know, not just dropping
chemical weapons on on Kurds. Uh he was
engaged in the wholesale slaughter of
both Kurds in the north and Shia in the
south and then the Kuwaitis when he was,
you know, minister of whatever it was he
was minister of.
>> Yeah. He came to Kuwait while he was in
Kuwait during
>> he was the actually he was the governor
of occupied Kuwait. He was the the
butcher of Kuwait.
>> Yeah. So, um you were getting all these
reports from Kuwait telling you what's
happening and then there you said it was
a spot up. Did you call it
>> spotcom? Spot.
>> Spot commentary.
>> Yeah.
>> So, we would do these like every 4
hours. And let me give you an example of
of the kind of um workload. So, on a
normal day, I I told you before the
invasion, I would go a whole day and
some days receive no cables at all.
like this, we're getting 10,000 cables a
day. 10,000 cables a day.
And so, not only do you have to go
through them, I became that that was the
first time I became a regular briefer.
The director of the CIA at the time was
Judge William Webster, who was a a
lovely man. He had been a federal judge
and then the director of the FBI and
then the director of the CIA. and he was
just a very kind,
nice man. So
the shift leader said, "Have you ever
briefed the director again?" I said,
"I've never even seen the director." He
was like a giant in my mind. He said,
"Well, you're going to brief the
director in 15 minutes, so be prepared."
So he came in
and I said, "Uh, I said,"Good morning,
Mr. Director." It was like 4:00 in the
morning. and he said, "What's happening
in Kuwait?" So, I started the briefing
and um
and he knew all the issues. He was going
to the White House in two hours to, you
know, brief the president and everybody
just kind of worked
hand and glove just together with each
other and then with the Kuwaiti
government. So, I did the six weeks on
on this task force.
you can't keep up that workload for much
more than 6 weeks. And then my boss
said, "Uh, listen, you're going to fly
to Taif. We're going to have you on the
ground in Taif working with the
Kuwaitis."
>> This is where the ruling family were.
>> The ruling family when they when they
first fled on the on the 2nd of of
August, they they made it out to Dahan
and then for their own safety, they were
they were then taken to Riyad. And then
I don't know how the decision was made
whether it was a Kuwaiti decision with
the Saudis or the Saudis with the
Americans or whatever but um they
decided to put everybody in Tif which is
a very nice place.
There was a palace there where they
could sort of have the government um
reconstitute itself
>> because Tif was where the Lebanese uh
summit happened even a year before
>> a year before. So everything was nice
and new and there were hotels and it
could accommodate. We're talking about a
lot of people cuz the Americans are
there, the British are there, the Saudis
are there, the Kuwaitis are living there
and there are people constantly in and
out, military, intelligence, diplomats.
>> It became like the place to go in Saudi
Arabia. So I went and um
and my my job was just to work with the
Kuis, whatever the Kuetes needed just to
to try to give it to them. But there was
one incident in particular. I think
about it a lot still even after all
these years.
You and I were talking yesterday before
we started uh we started recording and I
was telling you how much I I respected
uh Sheikh Jabar Alhmed the Amir. He was
he was a very kind and decent man and a
leader who genuinely loved and cared for
his people. It was something really to
to respect.
He was beside himself with grief that
this had happened.
And I sent a cable to headquarters. And
so the the cable went to the CIA
director. He took it to the president
and the president said, "Let's invite
him to Washington. Let's give him the
red carpet treatment. We'll invite him
to Washington and I'm going to tell him
what a great job he's doing and how much
his people need him."
Shake Sad was the day-to-day leader,
right? meeting 20 hours a day with
everybody who needed to be met,
strategizing, talking about military
movements, and then at the same time
trying to manage the Kuwaiti resistance
that was on the ground inside the
country.
>> Yeah, Shad
was a very military person,
>> hands-on, a good leader, the the best
leader that Kuwait had for that
situation. really both of them together.
It was an incredible team.
So, uh,
Shikh Jaba went to Washington with with
a delegation. He was there for several
days and the pictures that came out of
those meetings were just all smiles. He
completely turned around and he came
back and then it was just complete focus
on pushing the Iraqis out of Kuwait and
taking the country back.
Um
so you you were in dive and you were
going in and out of dive. Um and you
were just there ne with the ruling
family seeing what they want.
>> Um there was in October
which is the summit.
>> Yes.
>> Between when all the quaters got
together. Do you remember that?
>> Yes. Were you there?
>> I was I was not inside. No.
>> But were you were you
>> I was in D at the time.
>> D. Do you remember any do you remember
what happened?
>> Yeah, I remember she Salam. Shehikh
Salam at the time to the best of my
recollection was the minister of
interior
>> and he was supposed to be not supposed
to be he was the person in charge of
trying to manage the situation on the
ground. The problem that the Kuwaiti
resistance had at the time was that it
didn't have weapons and so it was hard
to smuggle in weapons to an occupied
country.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Especially one so small. It's not
like, you know, like there are these
giant unprotected borders. Even though
it's desert we're talking about, it's
still small enough that the Iraqis had a
pretty good handle on who was trying to
get in and who was trying to get out.
>> But, um, Shik Salam worked hard. He came
to Washington several times, um, in
order to, you know, sort of make some
side
negotiations for for weapons.
>> Yeah. Um, and what was the CIA's role in
this juring? The CIA's role was to give
the Kuwaitis anything they wanted.
Anything.
The goal was to kill as many Iraqis as
could be killed to drive them out. In
fact, I'll tell you a story. President
Bush gave the Iraqis an ultimatum. They
have to be out of Kuwait by this date,
>> 15th of January. 15th of January, that's
what it was.
>> And um I was working with an analyst.
He was our Afghanistan analyst. Nice
guy, not very smart.
And the Iraqis released a statement
saying that Saddam had accepted the
American proposal and he was going to
begin withdrawing. Nobody believed that
was going to happen. And this analyst
said, "Oh my god, the Iraqis are going
to withdraw. We may have peace."
And I said, "We don't want peace. We
want to destroy him." Why were you very
angry?
>> I came to love the Kuis.
You know, I'm reading I'm reading these
reports every day all day of wholesale
slaughter, massacres, rapes, and the
most horrible things that a human being
can do to another human being.
And I I just I felt,
you know, Kuwaiti almost.
>> Yeah. So, you were angry with them as
much as we were.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> So, then um
he said, "Oh my gosh." He told me later
that was like a slap in his face. It
never occurred to him that what we
really wanted was war. I said, 'Of
course we want war because he's just
going to do this again. If he just
drives away and everybody just drives
back to Iraq, what's going to stop him
from doing it next year or the year
after or the year after that? Look what
he did with the Kurds.
>> So there was no going back for him with
the building.
>> Absolutely not. He was going to have to
he was going to have to be destroyed.
Now, that gets into some complicated
diplomacy because from the CIA side, we
wanted to kill Saddam. That really was
our goal. We wanted to kill.
>> Could you have killed him?
>> No, we could we couldn't quite get to
him. Yeah.
>> Was he difficult to get to?
>> Very difficult. He was very It was like
Osama bin Laden. He's sleeping in a
different house every single night and
half of the time he's underground and we
never knew where he was.
>> He had decoys.
>> Mhm. Yeah. You know, people people used
to tell these funny stories like, "Oh,
you know, it's a body double." And
people would laugh. No, they were body
doubles. They were decoys. And it wasn't
just Saddam. It was OD and too. Both of
them had body doubles. One of them
defected to the United States. And we
met with him so he could tell us, you
know, what UD was like and what his
habits were. He was this a this sick
psychopath.
>> So you as a CIA wanted to take him out.
Wanted to kill
>> Oh, yeah. We wanted to kill him.
>> Mhm. You know, I say I say in podcasts
all the time, but in relation to the
CIA's torture program that the CIA
culture is such
that
they want us to believe that everything
is a shade of gray, right? And I say
that's just not true. Some things are
black and white, right or wrong.
>> Well, what the Iraqis did in Kuwait was
wrong. There's no shade of gray there.
It was just wrong. It was a crime
against humanity, a war crime, and it
needed to be dealt with as such.
>> So, um, leading up to the 15th of
January, um, Saddam was not going to do
going to walk away from Kuwait.
>> No.
>> Um, what did the CIA start doing to
prepare for Desert Storm? There was
Desert Shield before.
>> There was Desert Shield.
>> Yeah.
>> For one day, there was Desert Sword. So,
so what is what is Desert Desert Shield
then?
>> Desert Shield was to protect Saudi
Arabia because and most people don't
remember this. When the Iraqis
when the Iraqis took Kuwait, they moved
they continued to move south into Saudi
Arabia and the Saudis fought them back.
So, Desert Shield was to keep the Iraqis
contained in Kuwait so they couldn't
spill over into Saudi Arabia.
Um, Desert Sword was the day that the
bombings began where Colin Powell said,
"We're going to bomb Iraq back to the
Stone Age.
You can't win a war." That was
propaganda. Him saying that you can't
win a war just with Arab power.
>> But the idea was we were going to bomb
them until they begged us to stop. And
then Desert Storm was the actual move
back into Kuwait. So, I mentioned
earlier we had gone to the Russians.
>> Yeah.
>> And we asked Gorbachev, we said, "Look,
we know you're watching everything. We
know that you're friendly with the
Iraqis. We're asking you, please don't
tell the Iraqis what we're doing." And
Gorbachev never said a word. So, what
General Schwarzkov did, he was the
commander of the Central Command.
>> Have you met him?
>> Yeah. What a bonafide hero he was.
>> He's a legend in Kuwait.
>> Is he really good? He was a wonderful
man. A very sweet man.
He's dead now, but um legendary. He was
buried at West Point
>> um in the uh in the general cemetery.
>> So he was the guy the the main general
>> the main commander
>> of the coalition forces.
>> The entire thing.
>> How many? 500,000 uh soldiers.
>> Troops. Yes. From different countries.
>> Something like 36 countries. Yeah. It
was crazy.
>> Okay.
So, what he did was was what he called a
a a traditional flanking move that every
18-year-old
West Point student learns
>> where the Iraqis are here and we're in
the south. The Iraqis think we're going
to we're going to attack directly from
the south. Instead, we're going to flank
them. We're going to go 20 miles, what
is that? 35 km to the west, then go
north, and then hit them from the north.
Coming south. So, they're all pointing
south. We have some tanks there shooting
at them, but the bulk of the army is
coming at them from the north.
>> It's like a sandwich.
>> Yes. And we destroyed them. They on what
was then called Kuwait's highway of
death.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. I took some amazing pictures up
there. It really was a highway of death.
>> It became like a museum after.
>> Yes, it did.
>> It did. It was The Iraqis were running
in chaos.
>> Running back to Iraq.
>> Yeah. But there was nowhere to go
because we were coming at them from
Iraq.
They couldn't go west into the desert.
The Saudis were waiting for them there.
They couldn't go south.
The battle of uh Why can't I remember
the name?
>> I know. I know which one.
>> Kchi.
>> Kchi. Thank you. The battle of Kafi and
you know they tried to pull a a trick on
us in Kafi.
>> So they began approaching the American
line of tanks with the turrets of the
Iraqi tanks facing backward. That's a
sign of surrender.
>> And just as they got within firing range
of the American tanks, the turrets swung
around and they started shooting at us.
>> But we knew they weren't going to give
up. So we already had jets in the air.
And so it wasn't just Iraqi tanks versus
American tanks. It was Iraqi tanks
versus American tanks and American
fighter jets, including the the A-10
Warthog, which is they call it the tank
killer.
>> Was there no Iraqi jets?
>> No.
>> All destroyed.
>> Oh, they had a handful. We had this uh
we had this radar system in in our
office in the CIA. I loved this thing. I
could stand there and just stare at it
for hours. So, it was live and it would
show you the American jets and the Iraqi
jets and then the Iraqi jets are trying
to run away and then the American jets
catch up with them and then the Iraqi
jet it's not on the radar anymore
>> because we blew it up.
>> Yeah.
>> And everybody would cheer. I remember
listening to the recording
>> of a Kuwaiti pilot. He was escorted by
two American jets and the Kuwaiti pilot
shot down the first Iraqi jet,
>> the first one. And it was like this. I
have chills thinking about it. It was
talk about a cause for celebration.
Like, okay, now we mean business. We're
going to take every one of them out. By
the end of the war, there was no such
thing as the Iraqi Air Force. It just
didn't exist.
>> We had Muhammad Imbarak.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Big Mo, they called him. He's a pilot.
He's a guy who was uh tried to hit one
of the Iraqi targets and then he had to
flee the he was hit. He had to flee the
the plane and then he
>> he parachuted himself into and they took
him
>> uh with other uh European pilots
>> and then he was put on TV. Do you
remember that?
>> Yes, I do. I do.
>> You know, it's funny. In the beginning
of the conflict, we we just thought, my
god, if you get caught by the Iraqis,
you're done. But we had such
overwhelming force that we got to the
point where the Iraqis didn't dare harm
any of these prisoners.
>> Yeah.
>> They might punch you a couple of times.
>> Yeah. That's what that's what happened.
>> Yeah. But but but see remember when he
told me that they they came in a way.
This is him.
>> Mhm.
>> That that's when he was on TV. See you
see on the bottom images he that's when
he was on the podcast with
>> Yes. Fantastic.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I think um
>> Fantastic.
>> Yeah. It's one of the best performing
episodes with us. Anyway, um with with
that said, what was I going to say?
Yeah, if they if they didn't turn and
try to um
>> um to uh surrender.
>> Yeah, if they didn't didn't try to
surrender, um if they tried to
surrender, would you have not hit them
>> or would you were you going to hit them
anyway?
>> No, we we wouldn't if they had
surrendered, we would have just taken
them prisoner and we would have taken
the tanks. we wouldn't have had to
destroy them
>> because the the theory out there is
you've hit them anyway while they were
surrendering and going back. Was that
true?
>> Our position was that it was too late to
surrender. They had weeks to surrender.
They knew what the deadline was. Once
the deadline passed, there was no such
thing as surrender.
>> Yeah. They they they've put themselves
in this situation. that you can't wait
another month, another
>> and I'll tell you one other thing that's
burned in my memory is when the Iraqis
began to run away up the highway of
death.
Yaser Arafat
gave a statement and he kept saying over
and over again, "Genius, genius. Saddam
is genius."
>> Why? He thought that there was some
special secret plan that nobody knew
about and he was luring the Americans
away from Kuwait and it's like no not
genius.
>> 200,000 was killed.
>> Exactly.
>> 200,000 Iraqi soldiers.
>> You know, this is another thing too.
In 1990 when Kuwait was invaded,
there were two members of the United
Nations Security Council
that were pro- Iraq, Cuba and Yemen.
We went to the Cubans and the Yemenes
and the Palestinians and we said,
"You're going to have one chance to do
the right thing. You have to be with
Kuwait on this." And the Cubans said,
"We're anti-imperialist. You're an
imperialist. You're war mongers. We're
voting." No.
Okay. Well, we have an embargo in Cuba
anyway. It doesn't make any difference.
But the Yemenes wouldn't talk to us. So
the Saudis went to the Yemenes. There
were like
2 million Yemeni workers in Saudi Arabia
at the time and the Saudis said, "You
have to do the right thing. You can't
vote for the Iraqis in the Security
Council." And they voted for the Iraqis.
And Yemen has never recovered because
what the Saudis did was they expelled
every Yemen worker. 2 million. Can you
imagine? 2 million people being forced
back into Yemen on the same day. I flew
to Sana
in June of 91.
I was leaving Kuwait,
so I had to make this side trip to Sana.
And I was on a little propeller plane
flying in and for 20 minutes before we
landed, which is a long stretch of of
land,
>> Yeah. You could see Yemen families
living in cardboard boxes,
living in little tin, we call them
leantos.
And I remember thinking, how is this
country going to recover? This country
is going to be a failed state.
>> Yeah.
>> And and it is. And it's never recovered
>> because of stupid decision.
>> One stupid decision. And then there was
another thing. I I went to
I went to the um I went to the Diwania
of Aikh with Ambassador Ganim.
Um this would have been in like March or
April of 1991.
And he told us by the end of 1991 there
will be no Palestinians in Kuwait.
>> Yeah.
>> And we went back to the embassy and the
ambassador said, "I'm I'm panicked over
this. this is going to be a disaster for
a lot of innocent Palestinians. And I
said, I know, but you can't blame the
Kuwaitis after what just happened. And
then Yaser Arafat crowing about what a
genius Saddam Hussein was and that the
Kuwaitis, they got what they deserved.
They're not nice to us. You know,
>> you know, Yaser Arafat's
movement was born in Kuwait.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> So, it was very rich coming from an
occupied country to stand against
>> say that. And how is it possible for
somebody who was supposed to be so
brilliant and so worldly as Yasafhat
to come to a stupid decision like that?
>> I think it never occurred after that.
>> Oh no, I agree.
>> I think that was that was
>> that was it.
>> That didn't just affect him affected his
cause.
>> The whole movement.
>> Yeah.
>> Mhm. The whole movement. That's right.
>> And you had brilliant before that we had
brilliant Palestinians in Kuwait. Yes.
>> You can't blame
>> they ran the economy.
>> Yeah. And he can't blame the
Palestinians when someone says like I
mean the the normal guy who is not into
politics
>> right
>> when Saddam who just finished from the
Iranian war and then he goes I'm going
to come invade Kuwait and then I'm going
to liberate
>> Palestine.
So you being a Palestinian again what
they did many of them not all of them
many of the Palestinians that were that
were in Kuwait sided with the Iraqis
>> that was wrong regardless of what's been
told you told you but I understand their
position but that doesn't mean that they
were right
>> I totally agree
>> right
>> so
>> my analysis is the same
>> yeah I mean they're humans at the end of
the day when someone plays on their
emotions and then we're going to
liberate they made they made them do
something wrong
>> that's that So Yaser Alfat at the time
and then the the Arab League was there
was a crack in the Arab League.
>> Boy, was there.
>> Yeah. So Libya was it Libya? Correct me
if I'm wrong. Right. Libya, Yemen.
>> Jordan.
>> Mhm.
>> Jordan. Jordan.
>> Jordan was in a weird position.
>> Yeah. Jordan was did not vote with
Kuwait in the Arab League because the
Arab League vote was a very important
one as well.
the the Jordanians felt squeezed because
they had so many Palestinians in Jordan.
They were afraid of an uprising if they
were to side with the Kuwaitis.
>> Mhm.
>> So yeah, and they had they had Palestine
Syria.
>> Yeah.
Was it surprisingly because he wasn't
>> well don't forget there was that big
split in the bath parties from the 1960s
and so
so Hafas al-Assad
saw this as his opportunity to
ingratiate himself with the west. I
actually went to Syria in 92
or 93
and I had to go through this series of
briefings because Syria was what we
called a denied area. There was no CIA
presence. There was barely an American
presence at all. We had a small embassy
and um they said, "Look, you know, the
Mabarat is going to follow you
everywhere you go." Which they did, no
problem. And um
they said, "You're never going to see
you're never going to meet a Syrian and
you're never going to see the inside of
a Syrian home."
>> I said, "Okay, that's fine." So I flew
from Aman to Damascus.
I stayed at the Marriott Hotel in
central Damascus.
There was a Swedish woman who was
married to a Syrian doctor and she gave
tours of Damascus to visiting diplomats.
So I hired her and she took me all
around and showed me the sites. It was
very nice. And then she said, "Is there
anything you'd like to do?" I said,
"Yeah, I'd like to go to the souk. I
love suks all all across the Middle
East."
>> I said, "I'd like to go to the souk."
And you know, everybody says the
Damascus tablecloths are so beautiful
and I want to buy a box and maybe a tawa
set, you know, something like that.
And she said, "Well, I I can't take you.
You're going to have to go alone." I
said, "That's fine." So I went alone
and I went into the shop and this guy
asks me
I said
and he just went.
He had never met an American before.
>> Yeah.
>> Ever.
>> Wow.
>> And he asked me what I was doing in
Syria and I said, "Oh, I'm just visiting
for a few days. I've never been to Syria
before. It's an incredible place. The
food. Oh my god, the people are so nice.
>> Yeah.
>> I left his house at 2:00 in the morning.
>> Oh wow.
>> He invited me back. His wife made this
fantastic dinner.
They just wanted to know, you know, what
is the world like?
>> Yeah.
>> I said, I had been in Kuwait. Oh my
goodness. What was that like? You know,
we fought alongside the Kuwaitis. I
said, I know. And alongside the
Americans, we were all brothers
together. I said and um it was one of
the most beautiful experiences I ever
had in the CIA. Um
even the mukabarat it was Ramadan I
remember and so everything was closed
until sunset and then up the marriott's
downtown. You go up this hill and there
were these huge outdoor restaurants.
They were like tents
>> and families just packed in. So I'm
walking up the hill. Muhabarat is in a
car. Two guys in a car and they're
driving like 3 kilometers an hour next
to me. So finally I said, "Guys, why
don't you come and have dinner with me,
please? I'll buy you dinner."
>> Yeah.
>> And we ended up sitting together and
they were like, "You know, we have to
report this." I said, "I know. I know.
It's I It's no problem."
>> But I had a wonderful experience in
Syria.
>> Um, have you heard of Maza prison?
>> Mhm. Yeah. Hideous.
>> Hideous, right?
>> Hideous place. So far Madhan as Caesar
>> when we interviewed him was a 4-hour
interview. It's for the English
listeners. It's also translated so you
can actually watch it.
>> Excellent.
>> So the first hour and a half um he talks
about his experience in serving at Maza.
>> You know who was one of the prisoners?
>> Uhoh.
>> Salashid.
>> Oh my.
>> Yeah. And he used to be the nurse that
visits him. So he told us a lot of very
eyeopening stories about what has if
you're interested in Syria and want to
know how does a Syrian person live day
today. They are not exposed to what is
happening.
>> They have no idea what's happening in
the world. They're given propaganda.
>> They are told how to where to walk to
where what to do. So all of their life
they've been super controlled.
>> Yeah. So, um, they're they're good that
they're liberated now, honestly, because
they were living in a in a different
world.
>> Yeah, they really were.
>> Yeah. And and and they were put very
similar to what Iraq was. Every everyone
was afraid because everyone hears
different stories about torture and
people just vanish.
>> Working for the moukabar.
>> Everyone was muabarat. Yeah. So, there
were stories
a a a parent would tell on his son and a
son would tell on his dad.
>> How terrible. Uh because they were
because if both of us can be muhabarat
and we wouldn't know we were muhabarat.
>> Yes.
>> And say does something.
>> Yeah.
>> If you report it and I don't I get in
trouble as well.
>> You know during the Vietnam War we had a
similar situation in the United States
where the government was so paranoid
about anti-war activists threatening the
government that the FBI infiltrated all
the anti-war groups. And they got to the
point in the early 1970s where there
would be five or six people in one of
these meetings and all of them were FBI
agents and they're all reporting on each
other.
>> They just didn't know.
>> No.
>> Yeah.
>> That's crazy. What a way to run a
government.
>> Exactly. See, uh, intelligence can be a
slippery slope where you can become very
paranoid.
>> Absolutely true. Um, so going back to to
Kuwait and speaking about Muhabarat and
different countries, um,
Saddam tried to
hit Israel, right? He sent a few
missiles.
>> Yeah, that's that was one of the most
exciting. I mean, if you're an outsider
watching this happen, it it was very
exciting. So
in the American government there are
several levels uh levels of immediacy in
the cables. So a routine cable
means ah read it or don't read it.
Nobody cares. Maybe it says you know
facil is coming on a visit in three
weeks. Okay thank you. Nobody cares.
>> Yeah. Priority means okay there's some
diplomatic business here you know you
should read this sometime today
then after priority is um immediate that
means this is important read it now
>> then there's flash
which means emergency
and then there's the highest one is
critic which means they're coming over
the embassy walls God save
Right.
Most people could go through a 30-year
career and never see a critic. We were
getting multiple critics every day.
>> Oh, wow.
>> So NSA would say critic
hostile m hostile missile launch and
then it would have the geo coordinates.
So, I had this huge map of Iraq over my
desk and I would shout critic and
everybody run over to my desk and I'd
read the coordinates. If it was launched
from Western Iraq, it was going to
Israel. If it was launched from southern
Iraq, it was going to either Saudi
Arabia or Bahrain.
And then we would turn on CNN and 15
minutes later they'd say, "Sirens are
going off. There's a missile incoming to
Tel Aviv or Jerusalem." Those Scud
missiles that Saddam had were
practically useless. They had no
guidance systems. So, you just kind of
aim it like, uh, I think Israel is that
way and then they just shoot it and hope
it hits something.
>> You know, you can't win a war like that
>> at all.
>> Yeah. They also had something.
>> Why was he doing it though? Why was he
hitting Israel?
>> There was nothing else he could do.
I think he was trying to
>> drop countries in.
>> Convince the Arab countries that he's
the right.
>> He's liberating Jerusalem.
>> He's the good guy.
>> Uhhuh. That's right. He tried. He
failed. Um, there's something else I
wanted to say. When I first started
working at the CIA and I was working on
Iraq, as I said, nothing ever happened
there. So I started following the story
of of Gerald Bull who was a um
a British inventor
and he created something he invented
something called the big gun. That's all
it was called, the big gun. And what it
was was just a gigantic barrel,
like a gun that was so big that they had
to lean it against the side of a
mountain.
>> Okay.
>> Right. So maybe this thing is, you know,
100 meters.
>> Yeah.
>> The big gun.
>> Gerald Bull. Big gun.
>> Yeah.
>> He went to the Israelis and he said,
"Hey, I invented this big gun. It's so
big you have to lean it against a
mountain and then you can shoot. You
couldn't There's no guidance system.
It's just a giant bullet. Yeah. Right.
The the size of a bus.
>> Yeah.
>> And the Israelis said, "Get out of here.
We're not interested in your stupid
gun."
>> And the Iraqis said, "We'll take it."
>> Big gun.
>> Yeah.
>> That's the one.
>> What?
>> So the Iraqis bought the big gun.
>> Yeah.
And
they couldn't figure out
flying things.
Axe.
Is this a good demonstration of the big
gun?
>> No.
Yes.
>> Is it project? No. No. It's It's Gerald.
Gerald. Gerald Bull. Big gun. Okay.
Well, we'll find it. Dr. Bull's big gun.
So, the Iraqis, every time they would
try to use it to to experiment,
>> it would crack and they had to keep
repairing it. Finally, they they came up
with this idea of using something that
they called the condom.
>> Okay?
>> But instead of going over the gun, it
went inside the barrel so that the
barrel was smoother.
>> Okay? As soon as they figured out that
that condom would work,
the Israelis bombed the gun and they
murdered Gerald Bull in Brussels.
>> So why would they murder a judge?
>> Cuz they don't want him making any more
guns for the Iraqis.
>> But he's what is he's he's American,
isn't he?
>> He was British.
>> British. But the point there it was that
Saddam had been planning
for something bigger regionwide
and he thought, "Well, I've got the
Scuds. The Scuds aren't very reliable.
I'm going to try this big gun and see if
maybe this will work because we can fire
things at Israel."
>> Yeah.
>> Using the big gun. But
>> they would they would kill the inventor.
>> Yeah.
>> That's just that that
>> that's a very Israeli thing to do.
>> So that summarizes Mossad for you.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They just
>> But the inventor is just the guy who
invented the
>> Mhm.
>> He has nothing to do with Iraq.
>> No,
>> just kill him just to get get rid of the
threat.
>> Nobody else would buy this stupid gun.
>> Only the Iraqis were willing to buy it.
>> Kill the Iraqis.
>> Yeah.
>> Why would you go?
>> Why you kill him? Kill the Iraqis
instead.
>> Kill your enemy.
>> Weird how they how they work. And again,
okay, so um the desert so we spoke about
desert sword.
>> Mhm. M
>> and then we spoke about Desert Storm
that we all know at Desert Desert
>> Shield and Desert Sword
>> Sword and then
>> then Desert Storm was the end
>> the end. Um so we all know the details
of Desert Storm. We know we've we've
spoken about it at least here in Kuwait
and in a lot of documentaries.
>> This information is out, but I'm trying
to gather as much information from you
being a witness to what has happened.
>> Right. Um, so
>> and I'm proud to say,
>> yeah,
>> that at least I had the presence of mind
as this was happening to tell myself
this is historic.
This is probably never going to happen
to me again in my life and I need to
take pictures and I need to remember
this. So, liberation day.
>> Yeah. Where were you? Um, did you guys
So, we waited again. I'm just going to
recap the most important information. So
the the the sky scanner, what do you
call it? The um uh what do you
>> the satellite
>> that came through in time. So now we
know where all the Iraqis are.
>> Um a good picture of them. He told
Gorbachov as the states told him,
listen, do not tell the Iraqis. He said,
okay, I won't tell the Iraqis.
Everything is in place. All the troops
are there. Schwariskov commander is
ready. Was the date set beforehand in
terms of going in on the 24th of
February?
>> That's a good question. Um, if it was
set, the White House never shared it
with us. So, the president set a final
final deadline.
I remember a colleague
coming by my desk and he looked at me
and he said, "Tick tock, tick tock." I
said, "I know I'm going crazy. It could
happen like now. It could happen a week
from now, a month from now. I I I'm
going crazy.
>> So So this is happening with with Trump
as well and Iran.
>> Yeah.
>> So let's speak about this situation cuz
this situation is very relevant for
today as well.
>> Yes.
>> The how what is No one knows when the
command is going to come from the
president, right? And that's done on
purpose.
>> Yes.
>> Because the fewer people that know, the
fewer chances there are that it will
leak.
>> Yeah.
And you can't risk some reporter hearing
it from somebody who's talking too much
and the next thing you know, Saddam
Hussein knows it's going to happen
Tuesday at 7:00 a.m. You know, it has to
be a secret. It has to be
compartmentalized.
So the CIA director probably knew, the
the deputy director probably knew, DoD,
of course they knew. State, I'm not sure
you would really tell state. They don't
have a need to know. So you were just
ready waiting for the Where were you at
the time?
>> Sitting right there at my desk in CIA
headquarters.
>> Oh, you mean on liberation day? Yeah.
>> No, no, no. I was in uh Dahan.
>> Yeah. We were just waiting waiting.
What's going to happen? We don't know.
Nobody's telling us. So, we're just
sitting there.
>> Walk me through this this day. What?
>> So, we're in this we're there's a
there's an American base there and we
set up cubicles in this base. So, we at
least had a workstation and uh
it was the loneliest workstation I've
ever had because you know it's temporary
but you don't know if it's going to be
for what 3 days or 3 months or what. So,
I don't have anything there. No
pictures, no books, no nothing. I had a
map, a map of Iraq. That was all I had
up there. And um
and we were all like that. I mean, there
were maybe four or five CIA people. The
rest were all military. And then, of
course, the Kuwaitis and the Saudis. And
so, this colleague of mine comes up and
he says, "Tick-tock, tick tock." I said,
"I'm going crazy. I I want to go in. I
want to do whatever they want me to do.
I want to even if they want me to fight,
and I'm not a fighter, but if they want
me to fight, you know,
>> you were an analyst at the time."
>> Yeah, I was I was just an analyst. Yeah.
And um
and he said it's it's going to happen
sooner rather than later. He said the
president's very serious about this.
He's not going to play games with Saddam
and say, "Oh, you know, I'm going to
throw Saddam off offkilter
and maybe it's going to happen today and
maybe it's going to happen a week from
today." Uh-uh. No. We said this is the
deadline. That means it's the deadline.
We're going to go in and we're going to
start killing Iraqis.
And that's that's what happened. I mean,
it was like the minute that the deadline
came, we just started moving. Now, we
were in the back of this line because,
of course, there's actual fighting going
on at the front. And then Schwarzoff led
that flank and was hitting from the from
the north. And so, we let those guys do
their thing. We went in with the
Marines. there was a contingent of
Marines
um whose job it was solely to secure the
American embassy in Kuwait. Now, this
was the old American embassy
which was right by Kuwait Towers,
walking distance to Kuwait Towers and um
and it was in bad condition,
>> but our job was to go in,
open it up. Ambassador Ganim led all of
us and then he sent the first cable and
I'll never forget it. It said, "American
Embassy Kuwait City is now open for
business."
>> Mhm. And just reading that sentence made
me think, "We've won."
>> Yeah.
>> We've won.
And I mean like the war itself only
lasted but what?
>> Two days.
>> Two and a half days.
>> Yeah.
>> Mhm. And then um there was a story that
you with the tunk. [snorts]
>> Are we allowed to tell this story?
>> Sure. And I'll send you a picture of it.
>> Yeah.
>> I worked with a really fun group of
young State Department guys.
>> Two of the three are ambassadors now,
which is hilarious to me.
[laughter]
One of them got so drunk one night he
made an international call. when that
was expensive and hard to do.
>> Yeah.
>> And he passed out while he was still on
the phone with this girl.
>> And he got a bill a month later for
a,000 KD.
>> Wow.
>> She kept trying to hang up the phone and
it wouldn't disconnect. And she could
hear him snoring,
but he was so drunk. Anyway,
um there were Iraqi munitions
everywhere. Literally everywhere. We had
very strict orders to stay on the hard
pack. We were not allowed to walk in the
desert. We were not allowed to walk off
the sidewalk or off the road cuz there
were mines everywhere. I'll send you
pictures that you're not going to
believe your eyes. Just mines, grenades,
guns, ammunitions, rocket launchers. One
of these State Department guys, we were
out in the desert. We went to Ahmedi one
weekend and he picked up a fully loaded
rocket launcher and we said, "You got to
put it down. We're not allowed to touch
this stuff. It could be booby trapped."
He said, "No, I've always wanted to
shoot one." And he fired it and it shot
the rocket, but it blew his eardrum out.
>> Wow.
>> And he had to be evacuated to
Switzerland for surgery to fix his ear.
Oh, he got in so much trouble. But we we
loved Ambassador Ganim. He loved Kuwait
and the Kuwaiti people and he was just
such a good guy.
>> Yeah.
>> We decided to do something ridiculous
and we we found an Iraqi tank right here
in Kuwait City
>> and it it started up. We went in, we you
know tried to start it and it started
up.
>> Wow.
>> So we drove it to the embassy and um
then we opened the hatch. They saw it
was us. We said, "We've confiscated this
Iraqi tank. We're taking it as a as a uh
an example of war booty, right? Our
souvenir of our victory against the
Iraqis." And the guy opened the gate and
we drove it in at the back of the
embassy. It's where the swimming pool
was. We all learned how to scuba dive
there.
>> And uh and we drove it onto the embassy
grounds and then they closed the gate.
And then the ambassador hours later, he
comes in and he says, "Who put an Iraqi
tank on my embassy grounds?"
>> Yeah, that's the way he he'd look at it
as a
>> Yeah.
>> as an ambassador.
>> And we said, "Well,
we thought it would make kind of a fun
souvenir." He said, "Are there any
rockets inside that thing?" And we said,
we didn't see any rockets. It was just
the tank.
He said, "I should expel all of you
guys, but you're good at what you do, so
I won't."
Okay, we can keep the tank. We'll keep
it as a souvenir. Um, but when you
walked into Kuwait, that was happening.
Yes. The day we arrived in Kuwait, this
is a typical picture from 12:00 noon.
the Iraqis in in the weeks before the
liberation, we started getting
intelligence just in little bits and
pieces that the Iraqis were placing
explosives. Oh, that's me with two of
the three guys.
>> So, we enhanced it a little bit.
>> Yeah, you did a good job.
>> Yeah, we enhanced it.
>> I'm in the middle, but I I look very
>> AI.
>> Yeah, it is better. It is
>> I look very AI.
>> Now, there's another one which which is
better. Okay, I did I did too. knew it.
>> So, we came in, as I said, at the very
back of the the contingent that was
moving north behind behind the military.
And for weeks in advance, we started
getting these bits of intelligence that
the Iraqis were putting explosives on
all of the oil wells in the country. All
of them. It was something like 640 that
that I recall, although I know you
looked it up and it was between 600 and
800. I think the number was 640.
>> Yeah. These pictures were taken in the
middle of the day.
>> So for the listeners, this is a a a an
oil well on fire and it's dark. It looks
like it's at night, but because of the
fumes, [snorts]
it has covered the
>> and droplets of oil
>> and droplets. Yeah. So it covered all of
the uh layers.
>> The whole desert was black. So the whole
desert was blackened and that can be in
12:00 p.m.
>> I told you I had been in Tif and from
Tif I went to Riyad and the fires were
so bad that they blocked out the sun in
Riad.
>> Wow.
>> And I remember saying, "Oh my god,
what's it going to be like in Kuwait
City when we get there?
>> This is really bad."
>> Imagine the health repercussion.
>> Oh, well, there were two things. I had
to throw away all my clothes when I got
home because they were just covered in
little specks of oil. And then when I
got back to CIA headquarters, they made
me fill out a workman's compensation
form. They said just in case you develop
lung disease.
It'll be, you know, on the record that
you've been breathing in oil for all
these months.
>> A lot of people developed a lot of kids
developed asthma.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, a lot of kids from a lot of people
from my age developed asthma. I knew a
lot of people and then when I asked I
thought that was normal, they said, "No,
>> no, it's from the fires."
>> From the fires. Yeah. Reddadair was an
American oil fire specialist from the
state of North Dakota. He would, you
know, every once in a while there's an
accident and and a well blows up. And so
his job was to go to Texas or Louisiana
or Oklahoma or wherever it happened to
be and put the fire out.
One fire, not 640 fires. So he assembled
an international team, Americans,
Kuwaitis. I think there was some British
to the best of my recollection from the
North Sea.
>> I think there was also I'm not too sure
but let's search it. I think I think
there were Scandinavians as well.
>> There there probably were because the
Norwegians know how to work with things
like this.
>> So there were two problems. Number one
was the fires. Number two was even when
the fire goes out, there's still oil
gushing out of the ground like shooting
100 meters into the sky.
And so Reddit dare, God bless him. He
came up with this idea. He bought a
Rolls-Royce jet engine and they rigged
it to put it over the fire and you turn
on the jet engine and it was so strong
that it blew the fire out,
>> but the oil is still gushing out of the
ground. Well, when it was finally cool
enough,
then they could cap it like they could
any broken well. And little by little by
little, they capped every one of those
600 plus wells. That's how it was done.
Huh.
>> Yeah. It was an environmental
catastrophe.
>> There's a photo of an of an animal. I
think it was a flamingo or it was a
bird. A bird. A bird. I think there was
a bird. Yeah. I need to find try to find
that photo. I think that the photo
explains
um
>> what kind of person would do something
like that.
>> It's very ugly what he did and you know
it's just you seeing all of your wealth.
Imagine someone just pokes a hole a big
hole in your bank account.
>> I'm glad you brought that up. I remember
I remember the prime minister well Shik
Sad at the time was prime minister. I
remember him telling Ambassador Ganim
that in 1990, for the first time in
Kuwait's history, it made more money
from its investments than it made from
the sale of oil.
>> Wow.
>> And then the war just
>> Yeah.
>> It set the country back 20 years.
Because that was the plan of the the
foreign investment fund.
>> Yeah. Because someday there won't be any
oil. and
>> and Jabar the Amir he was the uh
minister of finance before he was
>> that's exactly right
>> he developed he was if anything he was
really good with money
>> uh
>> he had a very long-term vision
>> yeah yeah so he developed that fund and
I think it was in the 70s it was the
first
>> the first sovereign wealth that's
exactly right
>> so he developed it just to be able to
put a plan for which is the uh the next
the future generations right
>> that's Right.
>> Um and and and we had to dig into it to
be able to to pay for for for the war
and uh with
>> and then the reconstruction
>> and then I think we just recently we
just got all all of our money back from
uh uh from Iraq. But but it's not the
same paying
>> it's not it's not the same
>> not the same all these years.
>> Yeah. If if I destroy your legacy no
matter how much I try to pay you corrant
see this.
>> Oh it's just awful. Yeah.
So it was a huge environmental attack on
us as well. It
>> sure was.
>> It was a huge environmental attack.
>> I remember people saying at the time
that they weren't sure the country could
ever recover environmentally from this.
>> And it did.
>> It did. But the desert was literally
black for a long
look at this.
>> Look at that. See See what I mean?
Black.
>> Yeah.
>> So there's this layer of oil.
>> Wow.
>> Over everything.
And then don't forget the oil is so
thick.
>> Yeah.
>> The skies are so dark you can't see if
you're driving off the road.
>> When we were coming into Kuwait
um on liberation day, there were two
French journalists that were behind us
and they went off the road.
The fires were so hot that they turned
the sand to glass in some places. And
when they went off the road, they went
onto this lake of oil
on this sheet of glass of melted sand,
they got out of the car to look to see
where are we? How did we get off the
road? And they all fell through the
glass and the their bodies were just
vaporized. It was so hot. They they
never survived. They never found the
bodies. They just
>> they couldn't find the bodies.
>> Disintegrated.
>> Mhm.
>> It was that dangerous, huh? It was that
dangerous. And in the meantime, there
are mines and weapons and grenades and
everywhere laying all over the ground.
>> I like this photo. Look at this.
>> Look at that. It's incredible.
>> Yeah,
this is Yeah, this this this tells you
this this shows a lot, you know. You can
just stare at this photo and you can
just
>> see what was happening, you know. And
that this is what I like about photos.
>> Yeah. They document. They document
moments.
>> That's right.
>> I like photos more than videos cuz a
moment you can see so much in a moment
than
>> I agree with you.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> And then with this kind of environment,
you can't, you know, eat the fish. You
can't grow anything.
>> No. So all the food is coming from
outside of Kuwait. Every morning these
Iranian Dows would would arrive at
Kuwait Tower towers and everybody would
go over there and buy, you know,
whatever they had that day. Lettuce,
pomegranates, apples, anything, whatever
they happen to have. For the Americans,
they would fly our food in on
helicopters. So we we would get these,
they're called MREs, meals ready to eat,
and they were leftover from the Vietnam
War. They all had dates on them from the
1960s, but these meals are good for 40,
50 years. They're vacuum sealed.
>> What did I just hear?
>> I know, right? It's crazy. [laughter]
>> So, you got me you you had meals from
the 60s.
>> But the problem was they are
specifically designed to be very high
calorie.
>> Yeah. Oh, very high calorie.
>> So, instead of, you know, 800 calories,
it has 5,000 calories to give you energy
to fight.
So I gained, you know, 10 kilos, 15
kilos while I was here. What would the
typical meal be?
>> Some of them were just disgusting. Some
of them were delicious. Like for
example, they one was the main course
was Swedish meatballs or they had uh
>> that was a delicious one.
>> That was the best one.
>> What was the first one?
>> They had mushroom and cheese omelette.
This is a 40-year-old omelette. You were
eating 30-year-old omelette. or they had
um spicy Mexican, you know, ground beef,
whatever it was. I don't remember. But
everyone was there were like there were
like
>> 10 different ones. And they all came
with a little package of freeze-dried
coffee, a little tiny teeny bottle of
hot sauce.
>> Mhm.
>> Um and um and a cookie, a cracker,
something sweet.
>> So you would have two or two meals a
day.
>> Yeah. Two or three. I we I would have
two of those
>> and then whatever I could buy from the
Iranians. And there was one store that
reopened
>> near the the hotel across from the
embassy. And all they had was bread. So
I would go in and say
and he would say, "Yes, yes." And if the
if I was working late, I'd go in and
say, "Nope, no more no more bread.
worry. I'll show you a logo. Maybe it
might ring a bell because there's um
this uh company called Matahan. It's
partly owned by the government.
>> Ah,
>> and all they do is just bread.
>> Oh, that that might be it.
>> Might be it. Yeah. And they'll do fresh
bread every day.
>> Oh, I'll tell you what. They put us in a
house.
We There was nowhere to live, right? The
Iraqis had destroyed everything. And the
hotel had no water and no electricity.
So they put us in a house.
>> They destroyed everything, huh?
>> They destroyed everything. The country
was just ruined. And so um
I I I slept in this house. It was
absolutely filthy. It might be the
filthiest place I've ever had to sleep.
>> And you've been to
>> Oh, I've been to 72 countries.
>> 72 countries.
>> I've been to the worst places on earth.
I've been to Yemen five times. Somalia,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eratria, Pakistan,
terrible places. I woke up one morning
and I I was laying on the pillow and I
opened my eye and there was a mouse on
the pillow and he was looking at me
and I thought, gh I I found some mouse
traps.
I found some mouse traps at the embassy
that had been left over from before the
war. And I thought, I'm going to catch
that mouse. And I still remember I
caught 23 mice in the house. Yeah.
Because
>> the Iraqis I mean there's nobody that's
gonna clean the house.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And the Iraqis have you know
broken the windows and they stole the
furniture and
>> so so what was the state of the embassy?
So this is the
>> Was it this?
>> Yes, that was it.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh my gosh. Yes.
>> That was it. They had bread every day.
you know, we had the
this is one of a few companies in Kuwait
that we're very proud of.
>> Excellent.
>> Um, it's a it's partly owned by it's
like the BBC, partly owned by the
government,
>> run by the almost by the government, but
it's one of the things that we're very
proud of.
>> Excellent.
>> Um, I was going to I was going to say
something. Yeah. So, the the the
American embassy, what was the state of
the American embassy when when you
walked into the embassy?
>> Well, I should preface it by saying that
the American embassy was very old
already. Yeah.
>> And the Amir of Bahrain owned the land
and he had already come to us before the
war and he said, "Listen,
I want you guys out. I'd like to tear
down the embassy and build a hotel." And
we were like, "Yeah, well, okay. All
right. We'll look for some land."
And then the war happened.
And so we knew we were going to build a
new embassy anyway. So we weren't making
repairs. So it was a terrible embassy
anyway. Yeah.
>> And then after, you know, September,
October, November, December, January,
February, 6 months of being abandoned
with, you know, dust storms and it's
raining oil and
>> Yeah. Yeah. And you probably have uh
soldiers break in and
>> Oh my god. And and they did.
>> And take tours inside.
>> Yeah, of course.
>> So, were the ambassador did he did he
evacuate before the No invasion? We had
an ambassador here, the previous
ambassador who evacuated
um and then
I don't remember if he was held hostage.
All of my colleagues in the embassy were
held as what they called human shields
in Baghdad. They they were chained to um
machinery in in Iraqi factories because
the Iraqis said, "Oh, well, they won't
bomb the factories if there are
Americans chained to the to the
machines.
The job is sometimes you're going to
die, right? If you're an American
diplomat or an American intelligence
officer, God forbid. It's a terrible
thing, but sometimes you're going to be
in a situation where you might die. And
so we continued to bomb the factories.
And then finally, Saddam let them go and
they all drove in a caravan to Aman. But
um the ambassador retired, he didn't
come back and was replaced by Ambassador
Skip Ganim. He was one of the finest men
I've ever worked for anywhere anywhere
in the world. I I've been I've been
unusually fortunate in that I've worked
for some really great ambassadors.
Chaz Freeman in Riad, Skip Ganim in
Kuwait, David Ransom in Bahrain. These
were really great diplomats, leaders.
and um he had a vision for exactly what
he wanted to do uh with the Kuwaitis. He
was joined at the hip with the Kuwaitis
both in Tif and in Washington. And so he
came in on that very first day. He
didn't care what the danger was.
Okay. So let's let's fast forward. So
after well during the liberation um from
what I know and you can confirm um the
information is they you didn't just hit
the Iraqis in Kuwait you also hit them
in Baad
>> hit them everywhere.
>> Yeah Basra Baghdad
>> all over the country
>> that was on between the 24th and it
didn't stop right there was another and
then there was an uprising against
Saddam from the Kurds and the Shia from
the south.
>> That's right. And then did you as
Americans try to protect them or
>> this is this is where President Bush
made a made a mistake. Now he explains
himself in his in his memoir. But man, I
remember I remember watching his press
conference on TV where he said we were
going to stop that we had promised the
Egyptians and the Syrians that we would
not try to overthrow Saddam because they
were worried about the Iranians.
So, well, the the Egyptians were and um
and so he said he was calling for a
ceasefire and we were like, "What?
Ceasefire? We're winning? Why would we
stop shooting if we're winning? We had
chased them all the way back to Baghdad.
If we if we continued to Baghdad, we
could overthrow Saddam in 1991."
>> Yeah.
>> He had promised President Mubarak of
Egypt that we would stop. And he said
that if we hadn't stopped, we would have
lost all of our Arab partners because
they didn't want to see him overthrown.
They just wanted to see him pushed out
of Kuwait.
So [snorts]
Saddam
immediately began to bomb the Kurds and
the uh and the Shia.
So then we
we created these nofly zones. Well, at
first before the no-fly zones, we passed
we we forced the passage of a United
Nations Security Council resolution um
banning the bombing of the Kurds in the
Shia at the risk of American fighter
jets shooting Iraqi jets down. And we
did like like I said, by the end of it,
there was no such thing as the Iraqi Air
Force. But then once we we banned
fixedwing aircraft, yeah, no problem.
The Iraqis then just started shooting at
them with helicopters.
>> That wasn't banned.
>> That wasn't banned, which was a stupid
mistake that the American government had
made.
>> So then we had to create the no-fly
zones.
And this was this constant patrolling of
the northern third of Iraq and the
southern third of Iraq. And anytime the
Iraqis would cross the line, we would
shoot down the the plane or the
helicopter. But then that that went
through the Bush presidency and went
through the Clinton presidency into the
George W. Bush presidency. It's like
what what are we doing?
>> He was just annihilating his his people.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. It's like either we're serious
about this or we're not serious about
this. One or the other.
>> There the Iraqis were sanctioned.
>> Yes.
>> At the time. And they were the Iraqi
people were suffering
>> very very badly.
>> They were suffering. Um they've again
look and this is the thing this is the
tra tragedy of having bad leaders is
they can put their people into
situations and
>> people a lot of people will blame the
Americans or the Kuwaitis or what have
you. But we didn't ask to be invaded. We
didn't ask to to have our country
destroyed.
>> That's right.
>> Why should we be responsible for this
country's leader's decision? And if he's
going to do this to his people
>> Yes. then he's the person to blame. It's
not people, it's not other countries
surrounding defending themselves from a
crazy person.
>> You know, the conventional wisdom at the
CIA at the time, the the analysis at the
CIA was there was probably
some Sunni general who was willing to
shoot him. There had to be somebody.
>> That had to be right.
>> Right. That that was our analysis.
Probably
>> somebody from Tit.
>> So So you can recruit him. Yeah.
>> So, you were looking to recruit someone
to to kill Saddam,
>> but everybody was so terrified of him.
>> No one no one could do it.
>> They didn't dare try
>> or think about it.
>> No.
>> So, everyone everyone was scared to
overthrow Saddam. So,
>> and that's actually what led me to
switch to counterterrorism operations. I
was like, I can't keep doing this. Year
after year after year, it's the same
thing. Iraq, Iraq, Iraq. I was I was
ready to be promoted to the seniormost
analytic level and my boss said to get
the promotion you need to write a
national intelligence estimate an NIE
this is the highest level paper that the
intelligence community produces and it's
it represents the entire intelligence
community you most countries have one
intelligence service or maybe two one
for foreign one for domestic we have 18
18 different intelligence agencies in
the US government and they all have to
agree. So my boss said that the
president wants a paper and he wants it
to be called Iraq Saddam's next 12
months and he wanted me to predict what
Saddam would do in the next 12 months.
So this was what is Saddam going to do
in 1997.
Okay. So I said Saddam could threaten
the Kurds, he could threaten the Shia,
he could threaten Kuwait.
And so I write this. It's maybe 40 pages
long.
>> There's nothing new though.
>> No, nothing. Literally nothing. And so
we call a meeting of the entire
intelligence community. These are very,
very difficult coordination sessions.
And here's what they do.
All 18 of us plus the national
intelligence officer who is chairing the
meeting. We're all sitting around this
conference room table. And he says,
"Okay, ladies and gentlemen, first
sentence,
Saddam Hussein will continue to be
challenged by Western powers throughout
1997. Does anybody have any changes?"
And all 18 have to say, "That sentence
looks good." And then you read the
second sentence.
>> Oh wow.
>> For 40 pages.
>> Oh, no way.
>> Uhhuh. So at the end of it, it took
about six hours.
At the end of it, the national
intelligence officer comes up to me and
he says, "That was the fastest
coordination session I have ever
presided over." And I said, "Ben, I'm
ashamed of this paper. Threatened the
Kurds, threatened the Shia, threatened
the Kuwaitis. All I needed to do is take
the last five of these and change the
date.
>> I said, "I'm embarrassed that the
president's going to read this." He
said, "No, no, this was good. This was
good." They sent it to the president. He
sends it back and he writes on the
cover, "Excellent."
And I said, "I quit.
>> There's nothing that you can
>> I quit."
>> Clearly, Bill Clinton was not serious
about challenging Saddam Hussein. I
said, I'm not going to do this for three
more years. So, I said, I'm going to go
I'm going to go into operations. I need
some excitement in my life. I'm not
doing this anymore.
>> And this is when you switch to uh
Greece. We spoke about this on the first
episode. Yeah.
>> So, whoever wants to listen to the rest
of the story, go to the first episode
and then we're also going to speak about
Afghanistan in the first episode, but
now we're going to come back to where we
left from the first episode, which is
relevant
>> to to Kuwait, which is Iraq.
>> Mhm. So what happened and now I have
I've read your book and I've made a
couple of notes which I think is very
important what that you've mentioned in
your book. You said on so that was a few
months before the invasion of Iraq or
the liberation depending on the
narrative you'd like to believe in.
>> Um so on August 1st 2002 a few months
before the invasion
you were exposed to the information of
invading Iraq in spring 2003. That was
before Congress.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Before
>> Congress had no idea.
>> Before before anyone signing up to the
plan,
>> the CIA exposed you to obviously you had
to sign some. Tell me the story.
>> Well, I had uh on the strength of the
Abu Zuba capture in Pakistan. I was a
star when I got back to headquarters.
And so the deputy director for
operations of the whole CIA asked me to
be his assistant. This was a very very
highly soughtafter position.
And so, and I hadn't even applied for
it. He chose me to be his assistant. In
that position,
you have access to literally everything
that the CIA is doing everywhere in the
world.
>> Wow.
>> It's a very heavy job.
>> So, on my first day, I went up to the
seven, we were on the seventh floor,
which is the leadership floor. The
director is there, the deputy director,
the executive director, and all the
associate deputy directors. Very big
deal. And you know, you're walking down
the hall and one day, oh, but there's
the president. Oh, there's the vice
president. Oh, the secretary of defense
came for a visit. It's a big deal.
>> So, I go in on the very first day and I
said like this. I said, "So, what are we
doing?" And he says, "Actually, I can't
tell you. go to the sixth floor to the
office of security. They have some
secrecy agreements they need for you to
sign. I said, "Okay." I go down the
sixth floor, knock on the door. I knew
the guy, the security officer. So, his
name was John as well. So, I go in, I
said, "John, what do you have for me?"
He had six secrecy agreements laid out
on the desk. And he said, "You got to
sign all these." Each one was for a
different compartment. A compartment is
information above top secret.
It's not just top secret, but it's top
secret and it has a code word. So only
if you are signed into that code word
are you allowed to know the information.
>> There were times when I went to brief. I
briefed the director every morning at
7:00 and there were a couple of times
where I started to brief and the
director would say, "Stop.
These deputy directors are not cleared
for the information." like the deputy
directors of the CIA are not cleared for
the information that I'm briefing. It
was crazy to me. But anyway, it
>> is crazy. Who was it? Who was the
director at the time?
>> George Tennant.
>> George Tennant. Okay.
>> So, I signed the six secrecy agreements
and I said, "So, what's up? What are we
doing?" And he goes like this.
"Well,
next year we're going to invade Iraq.
We're going to overthrow Saddam Hussein.
And we're going to move all of our air
assets out of Saudi Arabia into southern
Iraq where we are going to create the
world's largest air force base. Thus,
he said, thus depriving Osama bin Laden
of the ability to say that we are
polluting the land of the two holy
mosques.
And I said, I said, have they lost their
minds?
and he said, "Yes, but it's too late.
The decision's already been made." And
I'm speechless.
The only thing I could think to say was,
"But we haven't found Bin Laden yet."
>> I mean, I thought that was like this
that was the only job, find Bin Laden.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
>> And he said, "Look, the decisions
already been made and the battle lines
are already drawn." He said the
pro-invasion
um group is the office of the vice
president, the office of the secretary
of defense and the national security
council. The anti-invasion group
>> the pro against the president
>> the vice president
>> vice president
>> the secretary of defense
>> Dick Cheney secretary of defense and
then who's the secretary of defense?
>> Uh Don Rumsfeld
>> Romsfeld
>> and the national security adviser which
was Condelisa Rice.
>> Okay. He said, "The anti-invasion
side,
CIA, State Department, and Joint Chiefs
of Staff."
>> I said, "This is insane."
So, we go or I go back down to the
office and the deputy director said to
me, "Are you read in?" And I said,
"Yeah,
are they out of their minds?" And he
said, "Yes, but it's not up to us to
question it. The policy has been made.
we have to implement it. And so we set
out to plan the Iraq war. That's what
the job was. To plan the Ara, huh?
>> Mhm.
>> See, this is where it gets a little bit
u
I don't know what to call it. It's just
disappointing.
>> Mhm.
>> Because the Iraq war wasn't viewed as a
>> It was an illegitimate.
Look, if you overthrew Saddam after
1990,
>> okay, that he deserved it. But we waited
12 years to do it.
>> You did the ceasefire. Yeah.
>> And then you came back with a a very bad
reason.
>> And the reasons were all lies and
everybody knew they were lies.
>> So the weapons of mass destruction,
there's a story around the So let's talk
about the reasons. So the main reason,
well, the reason that you were told
>> to build an air base,
>> not give us bin Laden an excuse.
>> Mhm. That wasn't that wasn't said in the
media. No one knows about that reason.
Was that the reason?
>> That's what officially the reason was in
the internally
>> in the Yeah. In the government. Yes.
>> Okay. So that's really why they were
invading.
>> Yeah. That's what they said.
>> But they needed an excuse beyond that.
We can't just invade because we feel
like invading. So they came up with this
weapons of mass destruction thing. I
remember sitting in meetings, Fasil,
sitting in meetings where analysts from
the CIA and analysts from the Department
of Energy were fighting so badly that
they would stand up and and people would
have to separate them.
>> Why? Because the CIA was saying there
are no weapons of mass destruction. And
then the Department of Energy says yes,
there are.
Okay. Where where are they? Well, we
need to send people in to be weapons
inspectors and we're going to find those
weapons. We never found any weapons
because there were no weapons.
I [snorts] had a theory and even after
all these years, I think my theory is
correct,
>> which is that there were weapons of mass
destruction until Hussein camel and
Saddam Camel defected to Jordan in 1997
or whatever it was 90 I think it was 97.
And Saddam was so worried that they were
talking to the CIA.
>> You saw them, right?
>> Oh, yeah. I met with them.
>> So, what happened?
>> They defected to Jordan and King Hussein
put them up in one of the palaces.
There was a group of us from the CIA
that flew out to Aman to
debrief them.
The first thing that struck me was
Hussein Camel had a gun on his on his
belt and I thought that was very bad
manners. You're in King Hussein's palace
and you're walking around with a gun.
Who do you think you are?
But as soon as we sat down, it was like
six of us, five or six of us from the
CIA and Hussein Campl and Saddam Camel
were on the other side. As soon as we
sat down, Hussein camel says, "All
right, I need guns. I need ammunition. I
need air cover. I need secure
communications. And my boss says, "Whoa,
whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait
one second.
We didn't come out here to make you
president of Iraq. We came out here so
you could tell us where the weapons of
mass destruction are." And he said, "I'm
not telling you anything. I'm a
patriot."
And we said, "Well, then there's no
reason to carry on a conversation." That
was it. That was the whole conversation.
We got up and walked out. We flew back
to Washington, but we planted a story
that there was this CIA delegation
meeting with Hussein Camel and Saddam
Camel and they told the CIA everything.
>> Oh, you planted that in the news.
>> Uh-huh. And then we flew out.
So, I think that when that story
>> Why would you plant something like this?
because we wanted Saddam to panic.
And he did
>> and he destroyed all the weapons.
>> That's what you think that that
happened?
>> Because everything that we found
in 2003, 2004
was buried in the desert and had been
buried in the desert for years. We found
countless Scud missiles. For example,
look, nuclear. We knew there was no
nuclear program. Everybody in the world
agreed there's no nuclear program.
Biological, it's impossible to know
because you can make a biological
weapons program in your kitchen.
>> Yeah,
>> it's just impossible to to know. Yes,
there is. No, there's not. So, really,
this debate was all about chemical
weapons. And chemical weapons need to
have a delivery system. You can't just
have this bucket of chemicals. What are
you going to do? Throw it on somebody?
>> You have to launch it in a rocket. The
Iraqis only had Scuds that that were
capable of of carrying a chemical
payload. And there were no Scuds.
So we found Scuds buried in the desert,
ruined, not good for anything. And we
think that they had been there since
1997.
>> So St. Camel and uh Saddam Camel um went
back. They went back and as soon as they
got to the Iraqi border, Uday murdered
them both.
>> Yeah.
>> In a hail of gunfire. Murdered them
both.
>> Yeah.
>> They had begged Saddam's forgiveness.
And he publicly forgave them and said,
"Come on back." As soon as they got to
the border, they were murdered.
>> I think they spent one I think. No, they
spent one There's a story behind it. I
think they spent one they were supposed
to spend the night with their family but
they told them no we're going to take
you somewhere to meet Saddam and all
that and they just they just took them
I'm not too sure of the story but they
took them I'm sure they took them
somewhere
>> not knowing where will they go just like
how is it might be your birthday party
or your funeral or your funeral and
death sentence right
>> anyway so weapons of mass destruction
there is a story about the the state of
union speech by George Bush yeah
I got to the office.
In [snorts] this job as the as the
assistant to the deputy director, I'm
getting 10 15,000 cables a day. And I
have to boil those 10 or 15,000 cables
to the five or six most important ones
that I'm going to brief to the director
the next morning at 7:00.
So
I would take one day off a week, Sunday,
and I would visit my children. I was
divorced. And
that meant I had 25 or 30,000 cables the
next day. So I would go I would visit my
children on Sunday and then I would go
in at Sunday night
to try to clear out the cables.
>> Did you know tough stuff with you that
can help you do that? You're looking at
him.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Yeah. So,
I go in one Sunday night and and
normally Monday through Saturday,
I'm at my desk at 3:45 in the morning,
right? And I'm going through it takes me
hours to go through the cables so that
I'm ready by 6:30. My boss comes in, I
brief him very quickly, and then we go
to the director's office, and that's the
big briefing at 7:00.
So I wasn't sleeping much and every
single day, 6 days a week, 3:45 I am at
the desk.
>> You know, I thought American culture you
start work at 9:00.
>> Most people do.
>> But CIA starts at 7:00.
>> CIA starts at 7:00. That's a normal the
normal start.
>> But you were there at 3:45 preparing for
>> Yeah. Because the the big guns were
coming in at 7:00, so I had to be ready
for them.
>> So um
I get to the uh operation center. They
were the ones that would hold my cables
for me. the operation center. I get
there 10:00 Sunday night and Colin Pal
sitting at the at the table. I said to
the secretary, "What's Pal doing here?"
And she said, "Um, State of the Union
address. He's doing some of the uh some
of the reading." I said, "Oh, okay." I
said, "Hi, General Pal."
>> Hello. And then I went back to my office
to go through my cables.
One of the things that the White House
does every single year, it doesn't
matter who the president is, when the
White House speech writers finish the
State of the Union address, they send it
to the CIA for clearance. And if there's
something that's classified or something
that the president shouldn't say, we
take it out. M.
>> So
the speech comes over and it says that
the Iraqis had tried to buy yellow cake
uranium from the government of Nishair.
We knew that was not true.
>> Blatant lie.
>> Blatant bald-faced lie.
So I said to my boss, "What's up with
this?" He said, "You know, Pal was here
the other night." I said, "Yeah, I saw
him on Sunday night." He said, "Pow took
that out.
Somebody put it back in." Well, Dick
Cheney put it back in. So, I said, "We
can't we can't let the president say
that the Iraqis have a nuclear program.
It's not true."
So, we took it back out.
>> Two nights later, I'm sitting on my
couch with my girlfriend, who later
became my wife, and we're watching the
State of the Union address. She She was
also a senior CIA officer. We're
watching the State of the Union address
and the president says the Iraqis went
to Nishair or he said Niger. The Iraqis
went to Niger and they tried to buy
yellow cake uranium to make a nuclear
bomb. And I was like oh my god. I turned
to her and I said I said this is what
the war is going to be about.
>> This lie this lie that they have weapons
of mass destruction.
>> But he said it in that he said that the
British told him
>> Yeah. He said that the British
government said the British government
got it from the Italian government. So
we asked to see the original report.
I'll never forget this. So the British
send us the original report and I'm
looking at it. My boss and I are both
were standing next to each other looking
at it and I said, "It's a forgery." And
he said, "100% it's a forgery." I said,
"It's not even in the right font.
It's like somebody just sat at their
computer and wrote this pretend
intelligence report and then they wrote
top secret at the top and the bottom. I
said it's not even in the right format.
>> Mhm.
>> Like somebody with one day of experience
could see that this is a this is a fake
report.
>> Yeah.
>> They didn't care.
>> So where does the Brits and Blair and
see see this where was Dick Cheney and
Tony Blair's right? Tony Blair was was a
lap dog for for George W. Bush and Dick
Cheney. He was he was such a weak little
yes man that he would do anything Bush
and Cheney told him to do at the cost of
his own legacy.
>> Why Why would he do that though? You
being someone in the CIA looking at all
of this, what was in their interest?
You know, I think at the end of the day,
Tony Blair was was a neoliberal
imperialist. That's really what it came
down to. Yeah, he was a member of the
Labor Party. That didn't really matter
in the end. He was an imperialist.
That's what was more important. And
he'll always be seen as as a tool of the
Americans.
Do you think the the British, the
Americans, and maybe other countries
took advantage of uh um Iraq and
basically
colon colonized Iraq and took a lot of
resources?
>> Oh, actually, no.
>> No,
>> I think that was the plan. I think
that's what the Bush administration
wanted to do. Yes. take the oil. But
once Saddam was overthrown, see, they
really believed that this Sunni general
that we had not yet met was going to
just come out of the shadows and say, "I
am now the president of Iraq." And
>> so, so they didn't plan to hand it over
to
>> the Shia. Absolutely not. But they were
idiots. I'll tell you another story, and
this is why I'm confident that I'm
right. The night before the invasion,
George Tennant is the CIA director and
he asks me to take notes in the final
uh it's called a principles committee
meeting. So the principles are the
president, he chairs the meeting, the
vice president, the secretary of state,
the secretary of defense, the national
security adviser,
the two
well the deputy national security
adviser and the director uh for the
Middle East and then the chairman of the
joint chiefs of staff, the vice chairman
and the head of central command uh
general Tommy Franks at the time.
>> Big meeting.
>> Big meeting. So, we're in the conference
room. George is sitting here at the
table just like this. I'm sitting
directly behind him taking the notes and
it's all TVs. There's the vice
president, the secretary of state,
secretary of defense, conda rice, this
general, that general, the other
general, all on these TVs, right?
So, the vice president, I don't know why
the president the president wasn't at
that meeting. He was supposed to chair
it and something came up and he was
doing something else. I think this was
Dick Cheny's horse.
>> So Cheney was chairing the meeting.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, I often wondered if Bush even
realized that he was the president.
>> Like does does Bush realize that he's
actually been elected the president or
does Bush think Cheney is the president?
>> No, he just gave everything to Cheney.
>> He just gave everything to Cheney. Like
literally everything.
>> Yeah.
>> Unprecedented in American history.
So Cheney starts off by saying, "General
Franks, why don't you start the briefing
with the order of battle?" Do you know
what the order of battle is? I hate
order of battle briefings. They're so
boring. They mean nothing to me. So they
have this big map of uh Saudi Arabia,
Iraq, and Kuwait. And they say the first
mountain division is located 20
kilometers south of here and the the
horses are here and the tanks are there
and the this platoon is moving south and
I don't care where your little army men
are. Just do what your thing. I don't
need to know the details. So I'm writing
this boring stuff down.
And then General Frank says, "If all
goes as planned, we can be in Tehran by
August." What? And George, George is
just sitting there like this, like
stone. And he turns off his microphone
and he turns to me and he says, "Did he
say Baghdad or did he say Thrron?"
And I said, "He said Tehran."
And George says, "Are they out of their
minds?
>> What the hell?"
>> And then he turns the microphone back
on. And the rest of the meeting, he just
is sitting there like this.
So, the meeting ends.
>> Was George Tennant a good guy?
>> I have a uh
George and I had our ups and downs.
George was a patriot,
but he was not a good guy.
>> Okay. George suffered from what is
called um
um imposttor syndrome. Do you know what
that is?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. when you think that you're always
uh when you go to a big meeting for
example thinking that you haven't I'm
not supposed to be here I'm I'm just a
guy what am I doing here why am I the
CIA director I don't know what I'm doing
>> you know yeah
>> so
as we're getting up to leave the the
director for Middle Eastern affairs at
the National Security Council says he's
like giddy he's so gleeful he says
tomorrow when when we cross that border,
they're going to throw flowers at us.
>> Oh,
>> and I remember being shocked. So, I get
back to the office
>> and the deputy director says, "How did
the meeting go?" And I said, "Did you
know we were going to invade Iran?"
And he said, "Are they still talking
about that? We're not going to invade
Iran." I said, "Are these people
insane?" And he said, "Yes, they're
insane and they have no understanding of
history." He said, "We're not going to
invade Iran. We're not going to get
anywhere near Iran."
>> Why did they really invade Iraq? Just
because of what?
>> They believed that once Iraq fell, it
was going to start this movement in the
region and then Iran was going to fall
and Libya was going to fall and Somalia
was going to fall and Syria was going to
fall and we were going to be the
conqueror of all these countries and we
were going to have these friendly
pro-western democracies. It's it's
fantasy.
>> You know, there's a guy who said um that
there are there are
>> seven seven.
>> Yeah, that that was General um
>> he was a Clinton administration adviser
and a very good guy. General
>> I saw his video yesterday.
>> Yeah, we'll find it.
>> We'll find it.
>> General Clark. Wesley Clark. Clark.
>> Okay.
>> Wesley Clark. Yes.
>> So, can can you comment on that and give
us the context of it as well? So
the week of 911,
the Pentagon was ordered to come up with
a long-term plan. And the long-term plan
was to overthrow seven governments.
Iran, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Somalia,
>> Sudan,
and I forget the other one,
>> whatever it is. um
with the idea being that they were like
dominoes that once the first one fell
all the others would fall right away.
And General Clark said, this is kind of
a famous video. It's on YouTube. He
asked these other generals and he was a
four-star general and he's asking other
four-star generals, is this is this
classified? and they said, "Yes, it's
classified, but but they're nuts. These
people in the White House are nuts. They
think that this is actually doable."
>> How much is that influenced by Israel?
>> Oh, 100%. It was the Israeli plan.
>> 100%.
>> They were marketing it at the same time.
>> The Israelis love love when the
Americans will do their dirty work. They
love it.
So, so there was there was something in
that space or in that angle happening
between the White House and Israel.
>> Sure.
>> Every single time an Israeli prime
minister would visit Washington, and I
mean going back to the Ronald Reagan
administration, literally every single
time, they would say, "Please attack
Iran. Please attack Iran. please attack
Iran. And every single president would
say, I'm not going to attack Iran. Until
Donald Trump said, okay, I'll attack
Iran.
They're just just keep on trying until
they find that president who's willing
to
>> Mhm.
>> to implement what they want. And the
more presidents come, the more they will
develop. like like how we spoke about
Apac and they go to grassroots
nominees and they build more Yes.
influence inside the White House.
>> That's right.
>> And more influence in Congress
>> and more influence media.
>> We were talking about Israeli influence
at all levels of government. And I meant
to tell you a story yesterday and I
forgot.
>> There's a Texas state senator. Okay,
low-level. He's just some guy. He
represents a small area of Texas and he
emailed me and he said, "I think what
you did on the torture program was very
brave and I want to sponsor a a
resolution to make John Kuryaku day in
Texas. It doesn't really mean anything.
You just get a nice
thing that you can frame, a paper you
can frame. It has the big gold seal on
it and the governor signs it." It's it's
a nice gesture.
>> Okay.
>> And then he called me and he said,
"Listen, I'm sorry uh but this John
Kiryaku day resolution, it's not it's
not going to happen." I said, "Oh, okay.
What happened?" He said, "Well, uh, the
Israelis killed it." I said, "The
Israelis."
>> Oh, [snorts]
>> in in Austin, Texas.
>> Why would they kill it? and he said
there is a dedicated Apac lobbyist just
to lobby the Texas state legislature
and they said no John Kiryaku day. They
don't want they don't want anyone to be
a hero who can be against them at one
day.
>> It's exactly right.
See the thing is look I say they're
working and they are at the end of the
day if I look at them in a way where
we're we're sitting here saying what are
they doing in the United States and how
do they have Apac how can they have that
much influence on the White House
influencing the White House decision on
Iraq Libya Iran and what have you and
objectively if you look at it you say
this is a country which is working very
hard
uh trying to influence the greatest
superpower
>> to side with their interests.
>> Mhm.
>> And I think shame on us that we are not
working to protect our interest.
>> Yes.
>> All right.
>> I agree with you. Shame on us
>> for not protecting our interests as well
because our interests often don't
coincide with Israeli interest. There's
a famous diplomatic saying, I don't
remember, I think it was Churchill,
Winston Churchill, who said it, that
there's no such thing as permanent
friends, only permanent interests.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Yes. So, let's protect our
interests.
>> Yeah. We should be working hard to to
develop systems, to develop people.
>> Exactly. And sometimes our interests
coincide and then we work together.
>> Yeah. But everyone has to look after
their their own interests. No one's
going to come and because they're doing
that.
>> Um Well, they're doing that and they're
they're they're doing a lot of evil
things.
>> Mhm. the best way for us to react is not
just to point it out, but to develop our
own systems to be able to protect our
interests. And I think that's that's the
best thing that we can do at this point.
So, going back to to to
Iraq, I I have a question about the
remember the um the playing cards that
were developed.
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Was that developed by the CIA or FBI?
>> Yeah, it was the CIA.
>> CIA. Were you involved in this or did
you work?
>> Oh my god. I worked with a couple of
guys that did and they were so proud of
what they did. I thought it was kind of
silly. went viral.
>> It went viral.
>> You can still find them on eBay.
>> Yeah, it was in Kuwait. Really? Yeah, we
had we had them in Kuwait,
>> obviously.
>> Oh, they were so proud of themselves.
>> Yeah, it was a very very very clever
way.
>> Very clever way. They they penetrated
the the culture.
>> Yeah. Yeah, that's right.
>> Yeah, they were very smart. [laughter]
What else did you do that untold stories
about what happened in Iraq? Is there
something? So when when were you
involved when they found out when they
found out that when they found where
Saddam is?
>> No, I was stationed at the United
Nations at the time.
>> Okay.
>> Which is the worst job I've ever had in
my life.
>> Oh, that was the job before you left.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. That was the worst job you had.
Yeah.
>> Boring.
>> With a capital B.
>> That was the most boring chapter in your
book.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
Awful. Just awful.
Oh my god. I hated that job. And I
begged for that job.
>> Yeah, you did. because I wanted to live
in New York. I thought it would be fun.
I spent two or three years in New York.
I get promoted. I become a station
chief. I had turned down two station
chief positions to go to New York
because my sons were young.
>> You turned down really two really good
ones, right?
>> Two really good ones. Both in the Middle
East.
>> Yeah.
>> But if you if you didn't turn down those
options, where would you have been, do
you think?
You know, I probably would have retired
from the CIA
about
five years ago if I had stayed. I would
have had my my ex-wife and I used to
talk about this all the time. We would
have had
she used to say something very funny.
She she would say, "If we had stayed at
the agency,
um you would be recovering from your
first heart attack and I would be trying
to lose 20 kilos." And I said, "That's
probably true. It's
>> good that you're retired, though.
>> The stress is terrible. You work 18our
days, so you don't have any time to
exercise or to eat right." And everybody
ends up having a heart attack in his
50s.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> Amazing.
You spoke about um Ahmed Chalabi as
well. Ahmed.
>> Oh boy. I really didn't like Ahmed
Chalabi.
>> Ahmed Chalabi for he was he was a
dissident.
>> Yeah. A dissident.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> In in London was he based
>> he was a
based in London.
>> Yeah.
>> There's a there's a backstory about
Ahmed Chalabi. Ahmed Chelabi was one of
those very rare Shia Muslim Kurds.
>> Oh wow. That's rare.
>> There aren't many.
>> Yeah.
>> Um he left Iraq with his family in 1965.
He was a child and they immigrated to to
Jordan. He went to school um in the
United States. I think he went to
Harvard. was Harvard or Yale? I think it
was Harvard. And uh got a degree in
finance, went to London, got a a
master's degree in finance, went back to
Jordan and founded Petra Bank.
>> And Petra Bank was the goto bank for
Iraqi refugees. All the Iraqis living in
Jordan, they all banked at Petra Bank.
And then one night, Ahmed Chelabi
every single dollar, $36 million,
transferred it to secret accounts in
Switzerland, and escaped to Syria in the
trunk of his girlfriend/ secretar's car.
He was found guilty and sentenced to
death in absentia,
>> but by then he was living in London
wearing $2,000 suits and driving, you
know, Rolls-Royce.
So,
so Chelby
fancied himself the next president of
Iraq and he offered himself to the CIA.
Hey, if you set me up, I love the United
States. I could be the president of
Iraq. I'll give you the oil. We said,
"Hey, we like the sound of that idea."
So, we went to King Hussein and we asked
him if he would give a pardon to Chelabe
from this death sentence.
every Iraqi in Jordan lost their life
savings to this this
So in 1991
um as we're getting ready to push the
the Iraqis out of Kuwait, we meet with
all of the different Iraqi um opposition
groups in a hotel ballroom in Vienna,
Austria. And I mean there were like 35
different Iraqi opposition groups. So we
decided we're going to bring them all
together under one group called the
Iraqi National Congress. And the head of
the Iraqi National Congress is going to
be Ahmed Chelvi. So everybody gets to be
the head of their own little groups, but
overall it's going to fall under
Chelaby.
>> We
we allocated $6 million to get the Iraqi
National Congress running and then the 6
million disappeared. And then Chelby was
showing off his new house in Mayfair
London that he just paid cash for
because he every single dollar of the
six million. So we issued something
called a burn notice which was a a a
cable that went to every CIA officer in
the world and it says there's this guy
Ahmed Chalabi, he's an Iraqi and all CIA
personnel are forbidden from dealing
with him. Cut off. Forbidden.
>> Blacklisted. blacklisted
and then Dick Cheney
nine years later decides what about this
uh Chelby guy I like this guy and we
said no we issued a burn notice on him
we we won't work with Chel and he said
oh but I will and so they set up a new
division at the Pentagon the
intelligence division there had never
been one before and they created an
under secretary of defense for
intelligence
and his sole job was just to work with
Chel,
>> prop him up.
>> Yeah. So, we're having this argument
about the weapons of mass destruction at
the time and we're like, there are no
weapons of mass destruction. There are
none. And then we start getting these
cables from the Pentagon saying, "Oh, we
have a reliable source
and it says that there are weapons of
mass destruction and they're here
located at this in the in the the of Lee
the u the uh garden of Saddam's palace,
which of course we can't search.
Okay, we want to we want to talk to the
source." Nope. Top secret. You guys
aren't cleared for the information. CIA
can't can't you can't even know who the
source is. We're like we know who the
source is. The source is Chelby and he's
making the whole thing up because he's
we've known that for a decade. You guys
are being suckered.
And so he just kept with these reports.
Weapons, weapons, weapons, weapons. Bush
goes on TV says they have weapons of
mass destruction. We invade Iraq. We
never find anything. And Chelabe says,
"Okay, I want to be president of Iraq
now."
Well, in Iraq, nobody ever heard of
Ahmed Chalabi. He left in 1965.
They don't know. They don't want this
fat old man from London to be the
president of Iraq.
So, in the end, he was very briefly made
minister of oil, which you know, he all
that money too, and then he had a heart
attack and died finally.
But he was nothing but trouble from the
very beginning. He was just
and nothing more.
>> Wow.
>> Didn't know Ahmed Shi would provoke you
into a very good story.
>> You know, I I went out to London to see
him one time and I
>> That wasn't in the book.
>> No, that wasn't in the book.
>> Yeah.
>> I went out to London to see him one
time. It was it was a group of four or
five of us and I I took a brand new
young good-looking female analyst with
me
and the entire meeting was like this.
This was Chelby.
>> My goodness. He's a what what's the
right word for him?
>> Yeah. He's a
>> Yeah. I wanted to punch him in the face
and um and she said to me, "Listen, I'm
I'm not going to the to the other
meetings." Yeah, I'm I'm afraid he's
going to attack me or something. And I
said, "No, no, don't don't go to the
meetings." "No, only the men will go.
This is ridiculous." I said, "I'm going
to report this. I'm tired of this guy."
So, we we finally cut him off.
>> You know, it's a shame that um sometimes
there are space for people like this in
the world.
>> Mhm.
>> And they're given platforms.
>> Yeah. And they fail upward.
>> Yeah. They fail upward. And because uh
confidence is half of this. I I I
believe com being confident will get you
halfway there.
>> I agree.
>> And then you can BS your way through it.
>> That happens so frequently.
>> Yeah. Many people are like that and
there are a lot of kind people who will
just say, "Look, this is dirty business
and I just don't want to get involved
and they just walk away."
>> Most people do. Uh most good people do.
>> You know, I worked with a guy at the
CIA, very very bright. I liked him and I
admired his his intellect
and he was moving up very fast through
the uh through the ranks and he he
finally got to a position of leadership
in the uh counterterrorism center
and then we started the torture program
and I knew him. He was as left as I was.
>> I said, "What are you going to do?"
Because I was telling them internally,
"This is a crime. It's a crime against
humanity. I want no part of it. you're
all going to go to prison. You're all
torturers. You're going to go to prison.
So I said to him, "What are you going to
do?" He said, "If I if I say no, I'll
never get promoted again." I said, "But
you'll be able to sleep at night."
>> Well, he jumped in on the side of the
torturers. And then he had to double
down. When the Senate torture report was
published,
>> he was one of the five or six co-authors
of the rebuttal to the torture to the
torture report saying, "No, no, torture
worked. It was good. It wasn't torture.
It was enhanced interrogation
techniques. It didn't hurt anybody. We
got great information." I was like,
"Seriously?" You know what? He never
worked again. People are like, "We can't
take him seriously."
>> Oh, that's when we damage your
credibility.
>> Yeah. You're gone.
>> We can't believe anything you say. He
was on TV all the time. And then when he
came out with that book, people were
like, "Ah, come on, man.
>> Come on. Either you're a torturer or
you're not, and you clearly are." So
that was the end of it for him.
>> Hopefully, it's not the end of it for us
with you. Uh, John, thank you so much
for for accepting our invitation.
>> No, thank you for this lovely
invitation. I'm so happy to be in Kuwait
again. I can't tell you how grateful I
am.
>> Hopefully, it's not the last time. And
hopefully we'll have um we'll have look
this is something that we're cooking
together.
>> That's right.
>> You might not want to to tell the
audience right now, but
>> stay tuned. Stay tuned. Tell them stay
tuned.
>> Something more exciting coming along the
way uh being cooked and we can't wait to
sh We can't wait to share it [music]
with you one day.
>> Amen.
>> Till then, take it easy. Thank you,
Monira. Thank you, John. Again, we'll
see you soon. [music]
>> [music]